=== Benchmarking Cognitive Biases in Large Language Models as Evaluators.pdf ===
Benchmarking Cognitive Biases in Large Language Models as Evaluators
RyanKoo1 MinhwaLee1 VipulRaheja2 JonginnPark1,ZaeMyungKim1 DongyeopKang1
1UniversityofMinnesota,2Grammarly
{koo00017,lee03533,park2838,kim01756,dongyeop}@umn.edu,
vipul.raheja@grammarly.com
Abstract RecentstudieshaveshownthatLLMscanserve
as evaluators themselves: Wu and Aji (2023) uti-
LargeLanguageModels(LLMs)haverecently
lizeLLMsasself-evaluatorstoautomaticallyjudge
beenshowntobeeffectiveasautomaticeval-
uators with simple prompting and in-context thequalityofopen-endedgenerationsandcompare
learning. In this work, we assemble 16 themwithhumanjudgmentsviaanElo-scorecalcu-
LLMsencompassingfourdifferentsizeranges lation. Otherworks,suchasAlpacaEval(Lietal.,
andevaluatetheiroutputresponsesbyprefer- 2023b),alsoutilizeLLMs,suchasGPT-4(OpenAI,
encerankingfromtheotherLLMsasevalua- 2023),asautomaticevaluatorstoreducethetime
tors, such as System Star is better than Sys-
andcostoverheadofhumanannotations. Asnoted
tem Square. We then evaluate the quality
bytheseworks,suchautomaticevaluationleader-
ofrankingoutputsintroducingthe COgnitive
Bias Benchmark for LLMs as EvaluatoRs boards have a number of limitations, including a
(COBBLER)1,abenchmarktomeasuresixdif- preferenceforlongoutputsoroutputsthataremore
ferentcognitivebiasesinLLMevaluationout- similartotheevaluators’generationqualities.
puts, such as the EGOCENTRIC bias where a In this work, we propose COBBLER, the
model prefers to rank its own outputs highly
COgnitiveBiasBenchmarkforevaluatingthequal-
in evaluation. We find that LLMs are biased
ity and reliability of LLMs as EvaluatoRs, as de-
textqualityevaluators,exhibitingstrongindica-
pictedinFigure1. Wecollectasetof50question-
tionsonourbiasbenchmark(≈40%ofcom-
parisons made by all models) within each of answeringinstructionsfromtwowell-established
theirevaluationsthatquestiontheirrobustness benchmarking datasets: BIGBENCH (Srivastava
as evaluators. Furthermore, we examine the et al., 2023) and ELI5 (Fan et al., 2019). We
correlationbetweenhumanandmachinepref- thengenerateresponsesfrom16open-andclosed-
erencesandcalculatetheaverageRank-Biased
sourceLLMsandconductaround-robinoverevery
Overlap(RBO)scoretobe44%,indicatingthat
possible unique pair between each of the model
machine preferences are misaligned with hu-
responses, prompting each model to evaluate its
mans. Accordingtoourfindings,LLMsmay
ownandothermodels’responses.
stillbeunabletobeutilizedforautomatican-
notationalignedwithhumanpreferences. We then test six different biases to benchmark
their evaluation quality and categorize the model
1 Introduction
biasesintotwogroups: (1)ImplicitBiases,which
Large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., can be implicitly extracted from each model’s
2020;Ouyangetal.,2022)adaptedtofollowvari- evaluationviaavanillaprompt, and(2)Induced
ouskindsofinstructionshavebeenpopularlyuti- Biases, which add modifications to the original
lizedforseveralnaturallanguagetasks. Thegen- prompts akin to induce negative behaviors. As
eral standard for testing a model’s capabilities is shown in Figure 2, we find that the majority of
benchmarkingitsperformanceonstaticevaluation themodelsstronglyexhibitseveralofthedifferent
suites such as Fan et al. (2019) and Wang et al. biases, which may compromise the credibility of
(2020). Withtheincreasedusageoflanguagemod- theirroleasevaluators.2 Furthermore,weconduct
els as general-purpose assistants and their artifi- experimentsforhumanpreferencesbycrowdsourc-
cialnature(Dasetal.,2024),currenttask-specific ing six human annotators and collecting each of
benchmarksareinsufficienttomeasurethequality theirrankingsforatotalof300annotations. From
ofgeneratedtextsinthewild.
2Intotal,42Ksamplesareanalyzedacrosssixbiasesfor
1Ourprojectpage:https://github.com/minnesotanlp/cobbler eachmodeltotaling630Ksamples.
4202
peS
52
]LC.sc[
3v21071.9032:viXra
### Instruction: {instruction} CoBBLEr
### Response:
Responses
…
1. 1. 2. 2.
x
x
x
x
x
sledoM
…
### Instruction: {instruction} Evaluators
### Reference: {ground-truth}
# # # # # # # # # S S W y y h s s i t t c e e h m m o S S n t q e a u r a i : r s e { : b X e { t StX t } eSqr } ? XSt or XSq … Order
Compassion
Salience
Egocentric
Bandwagon
Attentional
Pairwise Preferences
…
x x
x x
…
x x
x x
…
amw b .n. codpeqfgrshtiujkvl > aebfgcd
Implicit
Induced
Figure1: Our COBBLER pipelinetoevaluatepopularLLMsthatareinstruction-tunedortrainedwithhuman
feedbackfortheircapabilitiesasunbiasedautomaticevaluators.
ourfindings,weobservealowcorrelationbetween 2 RelatedWork
human and machine judgments via Rank-Biased
Overlap (RBO), indicating that machine and hu- LLMsasEvaluators. Owingtotheeffectiveness
manpreferencesaregenerallyinlowagreement. ofLLMs,manyrecentresearchworkshaveinves-
Ourcorecontributionsareasfollows: tigated their utility in various downstream tasks,
such as machine translation (Kocmi and Feder-
• Anewbenchmark(COBBLER)forevaluating
mann, 2023), summarization (Shen et al., 2023;
LLMstoperformunbiasedevaluationswithin
Gao et al., 2023), code generation (Zhuo, 2023),
theQAsetting.
writingassistance(Schicketal.,2023;Rahejaetal.,
• Anexaminationofanexhaustivelistof6(cog-
2023), factual consistency (Cohen et al., 2023;
nitive)evaluationbiasesthathavenotbeencov-
Gekhmanetal.,2023;Luoetal.,2023),andmore.
ered by previous studies. We find that most
Additionally,manystudieshaveleveragedLLMs
LLMscannotperformasunbiasedevaluators.
forgeneral-purposeNLGevaluation. Forinstance,
• A comprehensive lineup of models (sizing
Liu et al. (2023); Chen et al. (2023); Wang et al.
from3B to>175B parameters)asevaluators,
(2023a)investigatedtheeffectivenessofGPT-4and
encompassing the current state-of-the-art lan-
ChatGPT against reference-free evaluation meth-
guagemodelscoveringover630kcomparisons.
ods,whereasFuetal.(2023)proposedanevalua-
From our benchmark, we find that most models tion framework, GPTSCORE, to score generated
exhibitvariouscognitivebiaseswhenusedasau- texts. Recently, Lietal.(2023a) andZhengetal.
tomaticevaluators,whichmaynegativelyimpact (2023)conductedsimilarexperimentsbyemploy-
evaluation quality. Thus, we propose our bench- ing LLMs as evaluators to judge the quality of
mark(COBBLER)formeasuringthecapabilities generationsinapairwisesetting. Althoughthese
oflanguagemodelsasevaluatorstoenablemorere- works present promising results for LLMs as au-
liableevaluationsthatarewell-alignedwithhuman tomatic evaluators, our work takes a closer look
judgment. at machine artifacts that could be detrimental to
We note that our use of biased and unbiased dataqualitybybenchmarkinganexhaustivelistof
preferencesdoesnotalludetotheabilitytomake biasesimpactingLLMs-as-evaluators.
completelyimpartialjudgmentsbutrathertheam-
plification of human-like biases within language LLMEvaluationBenchmarks. Itisbecoming
models. Asmostmodelsaretunedonhumandata, increasingly challenging to evaluate open-source
ourstudyaimstoestimatethisgapbetweenmodel LLMsastheybecomemorepowerfulandperfor-
andhumanjudgmentsuchthattheycanberefined mant. As a result, there has been an increasing
more effectively to mitigate against these biases. needtodevelopbetterevaluationbenchmarksfor
Assuch,wealsoaimforourbenchmarktobeap- measuring the performance of LLMs. However,
plied towards the development of future models, most of these benchmarks, such as LM-EVAL-
asindiscoveringnewgapsorfindingthatexisting HARNESS(Gaoetal.,2021), MMLU(Hendrycks
gapsarestillunresolved. etal.,2021), HELM(Liangetal.,2022)and BIG-
Bias BiasBehavior Example
ORDERBIAS Thetendencytogivepreferencetoanoptionbasedon System Star:x System Square:y
theirorder(e.g.first,second,orlast). System Square:y System Star:x
COMPASSION Thetendencytoobservedifferentbehaviorswhengiven Model Alpaca:x Model Vicuna:y
FADE recognizablenamesasopposedtoanonymizedaliases. Model Vicuna:y Model Alpaca:x
EGOCENTRIC Theinclinationtoprioritizeone’sownresponsesregard- Model Star (You):x
BIAS lessofresponsequality. Model Square:y
SALIENCE Thetendencytopreferresponsesbasedonthelengthof System Star: The quick brown fox jumps
BIAS theresponse(i.e.,moreoftenpreferringlongerresponses overthelazydog.
overshorterones). System Square:Thefoxjumped.
BANDWAGON Thetendencytoprefermajoritybeliefwithoutcritical 85%believethatSystem Starisbetter.
EFFECT evaluation.
ATTENTIONAL Theinclinationtogivemoreattentiontoirrelevantor System Squarelikestoeatorangesandap-
BIAS unimportantdetails. ples
Table1: Wedisplaythecharacteristicformatforeachbiasandboldanswersthatindicatebehaviorinfluencedby
thebias. Forexample,inCOMPASSIONFADE(recognizablenames)Model AlpacaandModel Vicunaare
associatedwithSystem StarandSystem Squarerespectively,inwhichthepreferredresponse(bolded)is
inconsistentwiththepreferredresponsefromORDER(anonymizednames). Specificpromptdetailsareviewedin
AppendixC.
BENCH(Srivastavaetal.,2023),onlyfocusongen- thaterrorpatternsofLLMsresemblecognitivebi-
eralLLMperformancebutdonotexploretheirca- ases in humans. Our work overlaps with these
pabilitiesasevaluators. Ourworkinthisdirection in some of the biases we cover, but we present a
overlapsdirectlywithBaietal.(2023)andZheng muchmoreholisticandcomprehensiveevaluation
etal.(2023),whoproposeaLanguage-Model-as- of LLMs. Along this aspect, while our work is
an-Examiner benchmark and LLM-as-a-judge to closetoWuandAji(2023),whoinvestigatebiases
study the capability of LLMs to emulate human relatedtofabricatedfactualandgrammaticalerrors,
preferences. While our experimental setups are ourworkismuchmorecomprehensiveintermsof
similar, we highlight key differences. We cover thenumberofLLMsanalyzed,thetypesofbiases
awiderdemographicofcurrentpopularlanguage analyzedandthecreationofanopenbenchmark.
models and an overall different focus on QA as
opposed to other domains such as math and rea-
3 COBBLER: CognitiveBiasBenchmark
forLLMsasEvaluators
son. Furthermore, our benchmark emphasizes a
widerrange ofbiases(implicit/induced)to better
Thefollowingcriteriaareusedtoselecteachtype
describemachineartifactswhenusedasautomatic
ofevaluationbias:
evaluators. Specifically,COBBLERmeasuresthe
extenttowhicheachLM-as-evaluatorisimpacted • General Applicability. Text evaluation tasks
ineachdecisionbycertainartifactswithinprompts shouldbegeneralizabletomostpromptingsce-
(i.e.,promptingformat,promptinformation)over narios;tasksthatobservetoospecificsubtleties
acomprehensivelistofcognitivebiases. withinthepromptarenothelpful.
• Impartiality. The prompt should not involve
Cognitive Biases in LLMs. While biases have
anyleadingstatementstoextractsomedesired
been well-known to exist in LLMs (Wang et al.,
qualityoftheevaluations
2023b;TalboyandFuller,2023;WuandAji,2023),
• Memorylessness. The current evaluation in-
manyrecentworksinvestigatingthebehaviorsof
stance should not rely on any previous behav-
LLMshavealsouncoveredsimilaritieswithcogni-
iors. Each instance should be self-contained
tivebiases. Somerecentworks(Zhaoetal.,2021;
whenextractingeachbiasmetric.
Liuetal.,2022;Luetal.,2022)haveshownthat
theorderoftrainingexamplesinGPT-3couldlead Wecarefullyhand-selectthesebiasesbasedonthe
todifferencesinaccuracybetweennearchanceand above three criteria such that they can be widely
nearstate-of-the-art. JonesandSteinhardt(2022) applicabletomostevaluationsettingsinassessing
captured failures in GPT-3 and Codex and found theperformanceofLLMsasautomaticevaluators.
Table 1 summarizes definitions of each bias type and other comparand models equally in propor-
alongwithexamplesinCOBBLER. Wecategorize tion. However, we highlight that some models
ourbenchmarkintotwomainclasses: (1)Implicit wouldnaturallygeneratehigherqualityresponses
and (2) Induced Biases. For implicit biases, we (e.g., GPT4 vs. KOALA), resulting in a stronger
feedageneralpromptthatshowssystemoutputsin inclinationforsuchevaluatorstochoosetheirown
apairwisemannertoextractanybiasedbehaviors responses.
within the model’s evaluations implicitly. For in-
SalienceBias(Length). (Schenk,2010;Zheng
ducedbiases,wefeedpromptsgearedtowardseach
etal.,2023)Theevaluatortendstofavorresponses
differentbias,similartoadversarialattacks,such
thatare eithershorter orlongerin length. Anun-
aspresentingfalseinformationthatmayinfluence
biasedevaluatorwouldbesplitevenlybetweenre-
evaluatorbehaviorsinacertainmanner. Hence,we
sponsesthatareshorterorlongerinlength. Weex-
notethatcriterion2isnotentirelyfulfilleddueto
aminethisbiasbylookingatevaluationsinwhich
thenatureofinducedbiases,thoughtheycanstill
amodelpreferredaresponsethatiseithershorter
begenerallyobservableinanevaluationsetting.
orlongerintokenlength.
3.1 ImplicitBiases
We categorize biases as “implicit” if they can be 3.2 InducedBiases
witnessed without includinganyadditional infor-
mation other than instructing the model to judge
Wecategorizeabiasas“induced”whenitrequires
thequalityoftwogivengeneratedtexts.
modifications to the primary prompt or the inclu-
Order Bias is an evaluation bias we observe
sion of additional information with the original
when a model tends to favor the model based on
instructions. We specifically look to test the ro-
theorderoftheresponsesratherthantheircontent
bustness of each of the models as evaluators by
quality. Order bias has been extensively studied
introducingfalseoroff-topicinformationandex-
(Jungetal.,2019;Wangetal.,2023a;Zhengetal.,
amining the impact that these setups have on the
2023),anditiswell-knownthatlanguagemodels
qualityoftheirevaluations. Forbothbiasesbelow,
canbeinfluencedbytheorderingoftheresponses
we would expect an unbiased evaluator to gener-
in their evaluations. We prompt both orderings
allypickresponseshighlightedbyBANDWAGON
of each pair and count the evaluation as a “first
and ATTENTIONAL ∼25%ofthetime(calculated
order”or“lastorder”biasiftheevaluatorchooses
RANDOMthreshold).
the first ordered (or last ordered) output in both
BandwagonEffect. (Schmitt-Beck,2015)The
arrangementsrespectively.
evaluator’s preferences are influenced by the col-
Compassion Fade (Naming). (Butts et al.,
lectivepreferenceratherthanbeingbasedontheir
2019; Västfjäll et al., 2014) is a cognitive bias
ownindependentjudgments. Weaddanadditional
thatdenotesadecreaseinempathyasthenumber
sentenceaftertheinitialinstructionstatingafake
of identifiable individuals increases. To this phe-
statistic by choosing one of the comparand out-
nomenon,wemodifythedefinitionforourusecase
putsaspreferredbyamajorityofpeople,suchas
tomeasurewhethermodelevaluationsareaffected
“85%believethatSystemStarisbetter.”. Wecount
by real/identifiable names as opposed to evalua-
tions with anonymous aliases (e.g. System A).
themodeltobeinfluencedby BANDWAGONifthe
evaluatorchoosethemodelstatedinthestatistic.
Specifically, an unbiased evaluator would make
evaluations similar to when anonymized names AttentionalBias(Distraction). Inadditionto
werepresented. theoriginalinstruction,wefollowasimilarsetup
EgocentricBias(Self-Preference). (Rossand from(Shietal.,2023)whereweincludeirrelevant
Sicoly,1979)isacognitivebiasthatreferstothe information about one of the comparand models
tendency to have a higher opinion of oneself or to test the ability of evaluators. For example, we
to more easily accept ideas if they match one’s include a meaningless sentence such as ”System
own. Wedefineanevaluatortobeegocentrically Starlikestoeatorangesandapples.” Weidentify
biased if, for each instance, the evaluator prefers theevaluatortobedistractedifitprefersthemodel
itsownresponseoverothers. Wenotethatanunbi- mentionedinthedistractionorifitsvalidresponse
asedevaluatorwouldchoosebetweenthemselves ratesignificantlydrops.


=== Beyond Reward Hacking Causal Rewards for Large Language Model Alignment.pdf ===
5202
yaM
92
]GL.sc[
2v02690.1052:viXra
Beyond Reward Hacking: Causal Rewards for Large
Language Model Alignment
ChaoqiWang∗,1,2,†, ZhuokaiZhao∗,1, YiboJiang∗,2, ZhaorunChen∗,2, ChenZhu1, YuxinChen2, JiayiLiu1,
LizhuZhang1, XiangjunFan1, HaoMa1, SinongWang1
1Meta, 2University of Chicago
∗Equal contribution, †Work done during an internship at Meta.
Recentadvancesinlargelanguagemodels(LLMs)havedemonstratedsignificantprogressinperforming
complex tasks. While Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has been effective in
aligning LLMs with human preferences, it is susceptible to spurious correlations in reward modeling.
Consequently, it often introduces biases—such as length bias, sycophancy, conceptual bias, and
discrimination—that hinder the model’s ability to capture true causal relationships. To address
this, we propose a novel causal reward modeling approach that integrates causality to mitigate these
spurious correlations. Our method enforces counterfactual invariance, ensuring reward predictions
remain consistent when irrelevant variables are altered. Through experiments on both synthetic
and real-world datasets, we show that our approach mitigates various types of spurious correlations
effectively,resultinginmorereliableandfairalignmentofLLMswithhumanpreferences. Asadrop-in
enhancement to the existing RLHF workflow, our causal reward modeling provides a practical way to
improve the trustworthiness and fairness of LLM finetuning.
Date: June 12, 2025
Correspondence: {chaoqiw, zhuokai}@meta.com and {yiboj, zhaorun}@uchicago.edu
1 Introduction
Recentadvancementsinlargelanguagemodels(LLMs)havedemonstratedremarkablecapabilitiesingenerating
coherent, contextually appropriate responses across a wide range of tasks (Brown et al., 2020). A key
approach to further refine these models is Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF), which
leverages human evaluations to guide the training process and align model outputs more closely with human
preferences (Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2024). RLHF typically
involves training a reward model to capture human preferences, which is then used to fine-tune LLMs via
reinforcement learning (RL) (Schulman et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2024b,f).
Despite the success of RLHF, reward modeling is inherently prone to spurious correlations, which are
associations in the training data that do not reflect true causal relationships (Veitch et al., 2021), and can lead
to unintended biases and induce reward hacking (McMilin, 2022). Reward hacking occurs when RL agents
exploitflawsorambiguitiesintherewardfunctiontomaximizerewardswithoutgenuinelyimprovingalignment
with desired behaviors or completing designed tasks (Amodei et al., 2016; Weng, 2024). Consequently, this
leads to misaligned models that exhibit biases such as favoring longer outputs (length bias) (Zheng et al.,
2023), agreeing with user’s incorrect assertions (sycophancy bias) (Perez et al., 2022), developing unintended
shortcuts when making predictions (concept bias) (Zhou et al., 2023), and implicitly developing discrimination
over certain demographic groups (discrimination bias) (Tamkin et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024c). These biases,
rooted in spurious correlations and reward hacking rather than true causal relationships, undermine the
reliability and trustworthiness of LLMs, posing significant challenges for their safe and responsible deployment
in real-world applications (Anwar et al., 2024; Qi et al., 2024).
To understand and mitigate these issues, it is essential to consider the sources of error in reward modeling.
The total error in the reward model can be decomposed into reducible and irreducible components. The
reducible error comprises estimation errors stemming from limited data and model approximation, which can
be alleviated by collecting more data or increasing model capacity. However, irreducible error originates from
1
inherent noise and imperfections in the data, such as the spurious correlations described earlier, which cannot
be resolved merely by increasing data quantity or model complexity (Geman et al., 1992). For instance, if
longer responses are disproportionately represented and favored among higher-reward examples, the reward
model may learn to prefer longer outputs irrespective of their quality, leading to the length bias observed
in RLHF policies. Similarly, human annotators may unintentionally favor responses that flatter them. This
bias can mislead the model, causing it to prefer agreeableness over truthfulness (Perez et al., 2022). Notably,
such biases cannot be mitigated by simply increasing the size of the dataset. On the contrary, it may further
exacerbate the effects of reward hacking (Ribeiro et al., 2016).
To address this challenge, we propose a novel approach in this work that integrates causality into reward
modeling to mitigate the impact of spurious correlations and prevent reward hacking in RLHF. By leveraging
techniques from causality, we develop a causalrewardmodel(CRM) that is robust to these spurious correlations
and captures the true causal relationship of responses on human preferences. Central to our method is the
concept of counterfactual invariance, which ensures that the reward model’s predictions remain consistent
underinterventionsonirrelevantaspectsoftheinput,therebyreducingtheirreducibleerrorcausedbyspurious
correlations (Veitch et al., 2021).
By addressing the irreducible errors due to spurious correlations, our approach mitigates reward hacking and
advances the development of more aligned and trustworthy LLMs, enabling broader adoption in applications
that demands high reliability and fairness. Specifically, our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We introduce a causal framework for reward modeling that incorporates causal regularization into the
training process, allowing the model to learn true1 causality from spurious relationship.
• Through experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our
causalrewardmodel(CRM)inmitigatingbiases,includinglength,sycophancy,concept,anddiscrimination
biases, which are common factors that lead to reward hacking.
• CRM is simple to implement and can be seamlessly integrated into existing RLHF pipelines, providing a
practical solution to enhance the reliability of LLMs.
2 RelatedWorks
2.1 RewardHackingandSpuriousCorrelation
The issue of reward hacking has become increasingly significant as RLHF grows in popularity over the recent
years(Amodeietal.,2016;Casperetal.,2023;Kaufmannetal.,2023;OpenAI,2023). RLHFalignsLLMswith
human preferences by training a reward model (RM) to provide feedback based on user prompts (Christiano
et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2024b; Zhang et al., 2024b). However, RMs are often imperfect
proxies of the underlying true human preferences, leading to instances of reward over-optimization (Coste
et al., 2023; Moskovitz et al., 2023), or reward hacking (Denison et al., 2024; Everitt et al., 2021), where
models achieve high rewards without fulfilling the intended objectives (Pan et al., 2022; Weng, 2024).
LLM reward hacking often stems from the model’s reliance on spurious correlations in the preference dataset,
such as length (Sountsov and Sarawagi, 2016; Dubois et al., 2024a; Huang et al., 2024), sycophancy (Sharma
et al., 2023; Ranaldi and Pucci, 2023), conceptual (Zhou et al., 2023), and demographic (Salinas et al., 2023)
biases. These spurious correlations, closely linked to reward hacking, can impair a model’s capability to learn
and generalize to broader scenarios (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Geirhos et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2024d). Without
proper constraints, models will exploit all available informative features during training, including unreliable
spuriousones,whichresultsinrewardhacking,evenifthetaskisverysimple(Nagarajanetal.,2020;McMilin,
2022; Chen et al., 2024e). To address this, our approach integrates causal regularization into reward modeling,
enabling LLMs to learn true causal relationships, mitigate the effects from spurious correlations and thereby
prevent reward hacking.
2.2 AlleviatingSpuriousCorrelations
Early efforts to mitigate spurious correlations and reward hacking in RLHF have primarily focused on
penalizing specific biases within reward models (Mnih et al., 2015), especially correcting for length bias.
1Here,true representstheuser’sbeliefaboutwhatistrue.
2
For example, Singhal et al. (2023) reveals that length-based biases in reward models significantly influence
RLHF outcomes, often overshadowing non-length-related features, and proposes mitigation strategies such as
balanced preference datasets, reward data augmentation, confidence-based truncation, increased KL penalties,
explicit length penalties, omitting long outputs, and focusing on non-length reward metrics. To address the
overemphasis on longer response, Shen et al. (2023) proposed a Product-of-Experts (PoE) framework to
decouple reward modeling from sequence length, thereby reducing the reward model’s preference for verbose
but low-quality responses. Building on this, Eisenstein et al. (2023) introduced reward model ensembles to
moderate reward hacking by diversifying the sources of feedback and reducing reliance on any single reward
model’s spurious correlations. However, this method only partially mitigates the problem and falls short
of fully eliminating reward hacking. More recently, Ramé et al. (2024) proposed Weight Averaged Reward
Models (WARM), which enhance robustness to distribution shifts by averaging model weights, offering a
more efficient and effective alternative to ensemble-based policy interpolation. ODIN (Chen et al., 2024a)
advanced this line of work by introducing a disentangled reward model architecture to tackle length bias.
Their approach separates reward factors into two linear heads, isolating content quality for use during RL
fine-tuning, thus improving performance without sacrificing efficiency.
In contrast to these approaches, our causal reward modeling incorporates causal regularization directly into
the reward modeling process. By enforcing counterfactual invariance, we ensure that model responses align
with the true causal effects of human preferences rather than being driven by spurious correlations. Notably,
unlike existing methods (Singhal et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024a) that address a single type of spurious
correlation, our approach fundamentally mitigates a broad spectrum of spurious correlations, providing a
comprehensive solution to reward hacking and enabling more reliable alignment with human preferences.
3 Preliminaries
3.1 ReinforcementLearningfromHumanFeedbacks(RLHF)
The SFT step typically starts with a pre-trained language model, which is then
Supervisedfine-tuning(SFT).
fine-tuned through supervised learning on a high-quality dataset tailored to specific downstream tasks, such
as dialogue (Bai et al., 2022), instruction following (Longpre et al., 2023), and summarization (Zheng et al.,
2024). This fine-tuning process produces a model denoted as πSFT.
During this stage, we will first need to have a dataset that consists of preference pairs
Rewardmodellearning.
of responses, (y ,y ), for each prompt x. Typically, these pairs are obtained by presenting them to labelers
1 2
(e.g., humans), who evaluate the responses based on their preferences, represented as y ≻y |x, where y
w l w
and y denote the preferred and less preferred responses, respectively. From a modeling perspective, these
l
preferences are assumed to be generated from an unknown latent reward model, r∗(y,x). In practice, the
modeling assumptions for the preferences can vary depending on the problem, but the Bradley-Terry (BT)
model is a commonly used assumption. The BT model computes the probability of one response y being
1
preferred over the other response y under the true reward function r⋆(x,y) by:
2
exp(r∗(x,y ))
p∗(y ≻y |x)= 1
1 2 exp(r∗(x,y ))+exp(r∗(x,y ))
1 2
Given a static dataset of preference data D ={x(i),y(i),y(i)}N sampled from p∗, we can fit a reward model
w l i=1
r (x,y) to estimate its parameters through maximum likelihood estimation. This approach is equivalent to
ϕ
binary classification and can be trained by minimizing the negative log-likelihood loss:
L (r ,D)=−E (cid:2) logσ (cid:0) r (x,y )−r (x,y ) (cid:1)(cid:3)
R ϕ (x,yw,yl)∼D ϕ w ϕ l
where σ(x) = 1 . In RLHF, the reward model r (x,y) is often initialized from the SFT model
1+exp(−x) ϕ
πSFT(y|x) by replacing the final layer with a classification head, which outputs a scalar (i.e., the reward).
Once the reward model, which serves as a proxy for the utility we aim
Fine-tuningwithreinforcementlearning.
to maximize, is trained, the next step is to apply reinforcement learning under this reward model. Typically,
the following objective is used:
maxE [r (x,y)]−βD [π (y|x)∥π (y|x)]
πθ
x∼D,y∼πθ(y|x) ϕ KL θ ref
3
Here, β is a coefficient that controls the deviation from the reference policy π , which is typically the SFT
ref
model πSFT. In practice, the policy π is also initialized using the SFT model πSFT. The KL constraint is
θ
crucial,asitpreventsthemodelfromdeviatingtoofarfromtheSFTmodel,whichishelpfultomitigateissues
such as forgetting (Schulman, 2015; Schulman et al., 2017; Abdolmaleki et al., 2018; Jaques et al., 2019).
3.2 CounterfactualInvariance
An ideal debiased reward model should intuitively remain invariant to spurious factors of variations. For
example, to eliminate length bias, the reward model should exhibit invariance to changes in response length.
To formalize this notion, we leverage the concept of counterfactual invariance (Veitch et al., 2021). We begin
by introducing some notation. Let Z represent the random variable corresponding to a spurious factor of
variation (e.g., length), and let T denote the random variable that encompasses the prompt-response pair.
A reward model r is said to exhibit counterfactual invariance to Z if r(T(z))=r(T(z′)) for all z,z′, where
z and z′ are realizations of Z, and T(z) denotes the counterfactual T we would have observed if Z were z.
Throughout the paper, we use the term “invariant"
or “debiased" to refer specifically to counterfactual
invariance.
T1 Z,⊥
3.3 CausalDecomposition
The prompt-response pair T can be decomposed Z1 T1 Z∧L R1
into latent components based on their relations
with the spurious factor Z (Veitch et al., 2021). T1 L,⊥
Specifically, we define TZ,⊥ as the component of T1
L
T that is not causally influenced by Z. In other
words, TZ,⊥ representsthe partof T suchthat any T2 Z,⊥
function of T is counterfactually invariant to Z
if and only if it depends solely on TZ,⊥. Under
Z2 T2 Z∧L R2
weakconditionsonZ,TZ,⊥ iswelldefined. Further
details regarding the derivation and properties can
befoundin(Veitchetal.,2021). Inthenextsection, T2 L,⊥
we extend this concept to develop a reward model
T2
that incorporates counterfactual invariance, which
Figure1 Diagram illustrating the proposed causal reward
enables debiasing against various spurious factors.
modeling. Here, Z represents spurious factors (e.g., re-
sponse length), T denotes the prompt and response pair,
4 Method R is the true reward, and L is the human preference label.
The diagram highlights the decomposition of T into latent
Ideally, counterfactual examples are necessary to components: TZ,⊥, which is independent of Z; TZ∧L, rep-
learn counterfactual invariant predictors (Quinzan resenting factors influenced by both Z and L; and TL,⊥,
et al., 2022). However, obtaining such examples which does not causally impact L. This framework shows
how reward hacking, modeled via direct paths from Z to
is challenging, especially in RLHF settings. For
L, can mislead traditional reward models. Our proposed
instance, given a response of length 100, it is very
approach aims to isolate TZ,⊥, ensuring counterfactual in-
hard to create a counterfactual response of length
variance and debiasing reward predictions.
50. Nonetheless, as suggested by Veitch et al.
(2021), observable signatures implied by causal graphs can be leveraged to regularize the hypothesis class of
the predictor.
Consider the causal diagram of reward models in Fig. 1. Here, Z is the spurious factor (e.g., response length),
T is the prompt-response pair, R is the reward and L is the preference label. The binary label L (e.g., L=1
when X is preferred) can be modeled under the Bradley-Terry model, where preferences depend on true
1
rewards. In practice, however, human labels are often biased, captured by a direct edge from Z to L.
As discussed in §3.3, T can be decomposed into latent components based on their relation with Z. In addition
to TZ,⊥, we define TL,⊥ as the component that does not directly cause L, and TZ∧L as the complementary
remaining part. And an invariant reward model should depend solely on TZ,⊥. Although precisely learning
such an invariant reward model is infeasible without counterfactual dataset, the causal graph reveals that
TL,⊥ is independent of Z. Consequently, any counterfactual invariant reward model must also be independent
4


=== BiAxisAudit A Novel Framework to Evaluate LLM Bias Across Prompt Sensitivity and Response-Layer Divergence.pdf ===
BiAxisAudit: A Novel Framework to Evaluate LLM
Bias Across Prompt Sensitivity and Response-Layer
Divergence
Jialing Gan*, Junhao Dong†, Songze Li*‡
*Southeast University, China
†Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Abstract—Bias auditing of large language models is increas-
ingly shaped by voluntary governance frameworks such as the
NIST AI RMF and binding regulatory regimes such as the Task η2=0.395, Δ=59.1% Sentiment η2=0.014, Δ=28.4%
1.00
EU AI Act. Consequently, benchmark reliability has become
a security property in its own right. Yet existing benchmarks 0.75
chance (50%)
often reduce bias to a single scalar derived from a fixed prompt 0.50
format and a single surface-level label, leaving two blind spots 0.25
that a vendor can exploit without modifying any model weights.
T
le
h
av
es
e
e
st
b
h
l
e
in
o
d
th
s
e
p
r
o
u
ts
nc
a
o
r
n
e
st
s
r
t
a
ru
in
c
e
t
d
u
)
ra
a
l
n
ly
d
i
c
n
o
d
m
e
p
p
o
en
u
d
n
e
d
n
i
t
n
(
p
c
r
o
a
r
c
re
ti
c
c
t
e
in
r
g
at
o
h
n
e
e
r
0.00 BJ Explain Judge Rate SC CTO Positiv
A
e nalytical Negative Indignan
S
t keptical Neutral
thancancel.Acrossprompts,meaning-preservingformatchanges 1.00 Role η2=0.014, Δ=29.5% Perspective η2=0.014, Δ=29.7%
shift bias endorsement by more than 0.7 on a fixed statement
0.75
pool. Within a single response, the discrete Selection and the
free-text Elaboration can express opposing stances, so a clean 0.50
aggregatecanmaskwidespreadinternalinconsistency(a“cancel- 0.25
lation trap”). Consequently, selection-only and elaboration-only
0.00
r
ρ
an
=
kin
0
g
.2
s
3
a
8
r
,
e
p
ne
=
arl
0
y
.5
u
7
n
0
c
)
o
:
r
L
re
L
la
a
t
M
ed
A
a
3
c
-7
ro
0
s
B
s e
r
i
a
g
n
h
k
t
s
L
m
LM
id
s
-p
(
a
S
c
p
k
ea
u
r
n
m
d
a
e
n
r
AE DS Milita
S
r
o
y ciologist PM Neutra
I
l nstitutiona
H
l istorical Famous Others Media Self
selection-only yet highest under elaboration-only on the same
responses. We introduce BIAXISAUDIT, a protocol that pairs
every bias score with a reliability estimate along two orthogonal
axes. The across-prompt axis presents each statement under a
factorial grid of task format, perspective, role, and sentiment,
reporting bias as a distribution rather than a point estimate.
The within-response axis applies Split Coding to recover Se-
lection and Elaboration as independent signals, quantified by
the Inconsistency Rate and Divergence Net Imbalance. Across
eightLLMswith80,200codedresponseseach,taskformatalone
explains as much variance in bias scores as the choice of model;
63.6% of bias signals in the pooled audit (up to 85.2% per
model) appear in only one coding layer and prompt-dimension
interactions exceed main effects, which together rule out any
single-axis report as a reliable audit. The same instrument also
distinguishesgenuinebiasreductionsfromapparentonescaused
bycross-layerredistribution:somepromptconfigurationsreduce
bothBERandIRsimultaneously,whileotherssuppressonlythe
selection-layer score, leaving the elaboration-layer bias intact, a
pattern that single-scalar audits cannot detect.
I. INTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) increasingly mediate high-
stakes decisions in hiring, lending, healthcare triage, and con-
tent moderation [1]. Biased outputs in such settings can cause
direct harm, including disparate impacts in hiring, lending,
criminal justice, content moderation, and search or retrieval
systems [2]–[13]. A separate line of robustness work shows
that modern ML and vision-language systems can be highly
‡CorrespondingAuthor.
)REB(
etaR
tnemesrodnE
saiB
Qwen-Plus Claude S4.6 Gemini-3F GPT-OSS-20B
DeepSeek-V3 Doubao-S2L GPT-5.4 Llama3-70B
Fig. 1: Bias endorsement rate (BER) of eight models across
four prompt dimensions (Task, Sentiment, Role, Perspective).
Task is the strongest driver (η2=0.395 on the OAT grid;
within-model ∆ up to 0.78); the remaining three dimensions
show smaller pooled main effects (η2 ≤0.014). On the same
set of stereotype statements, BER ranges from 0.07 on
union
BJ to 0.56 on CTO in cross-model means, with single-model
swings reaching 0.78.
sensitivetoadversarialperturbationsandevaluationconditions
[14]–[19], reinforcing the need to treat benchmark reliability
aspartoftheauditsurface.Policymakersandstandardsbodies
have responded with both voluntary governance frameworks
andbindingmandates.TheNISTAIRiskManagementFrame-
work [20] offers voluntary guidance for risk management,
while the EU AI Act [21] imposes binding obligations on
covered high-risk systems. In both settings, benchmark scores
can become central evidence in risk-management and compli-
ance documentation. Consider a concrete example. Vendor V
deploys the same model weights in two jurisdictions: an EU
high-risk HR screening application subject to the EU AI Act,
and a US federal HR pipeline whose bias evaluation is
documentedunderNISTAIRMFMeasure2.5.Whenaudited
underdifferentprompttemplates,Vobtainsmodelbiasscores
ranging from 0.06 to 0.78 for the same model weights. Both
reports are technically accurate: each score is a reproducible
6202
yaM
9
]LC.sc[
1v14090.5062:viXra
measurementunderthestatedpromptformat.Yetneithercom-
pliance document reflects the bias level that will manifest in
production, where the interface—not the auditor—determines
the prompt format actually seen by the model. The deployed
HRsystemthereforecontinuestoissuediscriminatoryranking
signalsthatneitherfilingcandetect,whiletheregulatorcannot
distinguishaselectivelychosensubmissionfromoneproduced
by a genuinely low-bias system. The audit protocol is thus
a security-relevant control in its own right: when benchmark
scores diverge from actual model behavior, certified systems
continue to perpetuate the underlying harms.
Existing bias benchmarks such as CrowS-Pairs [22], Stere-
oSet [23], BBQ [24], CEB [25], and CLEAR-Bias [26] report
each bias category as a single scalar, typically the rate at
whichamodelselectsthestereotypedoption.Weidentifythree
failure modes of this format, each visible in our data, none
of which a single scalar can expose. Together they determine
whetherthereportedscorecorrespondstothebiasofthemodel
actually expresses.
Motivation. (1)Format warps the verdict. With only
the task format varied, the same model shifts from a (a) A model may select a stereotyped option (Daniel) while ex-
plicitly rejecting it in its free-text explanation. Naive choice-only
BER ≈0.06 under BJ to 0.78 under CTO (Fig. 1);
union coding discards the explanation and records this response as a
variation along sentiment, role, or perspective produces no
stereotype endorsement, inflating the measured bias rate (typically
comparable effect. Recent work on prompt sensitivity in BR = #bias endorsements/#total). Split coding treats the discrete
capability evaluation [27], [28] reports analogous instability choiceandfree-textreasoningastwoindependentlayers,codingeach
that bias benchmarks have not yet absorbed. A vendor who separately, which exposes disagreements between them and reveals
whether a model’s bias score on standard benchmarks is over- or
selects the prompt format under which a given model appears
under-estimated.
leastbiasedcanthereforepassanauditwithoutmodifyingthe
model. (2) Labels betray the stance. A model may select (b) Refined BER via Split Coding — Naive vs. Split comparison across models
Mean |Δ| = 7.5 pp │ 3/8 models diverge >10 pp │ Direction: 6 over-estimate, 2 under-estimate
the stereotyped option while the accompanying explanation
← Over Divergence Under →
argues against that choice, or select a neutral option while GPT-OSS-20B† 12.5% 26.2%caution -≥1330.%7
Gemini-3F0.8% 14.4% -13.6
the elaboration in fact endorses the stereotype (Fig. 2a). GPT-5.4† 3.9% 15.4% -11.5
Conventional coding records only the discrete option, so the Llama3-70B 12.8% 20.5% +7.7
Doubao-S2L 14.2% 20.3% -6.1
surface label bears no defined relation to the stance the DeepSeek-V3 9.9% 14.5% +4.6
Claude S4.61.2% 3.6% -2.4
response actually expresses. Recoding the elaboration as an
Qwen-Plus 6.5% 6.7% -0.2
independent signal shifts the reported bias rate by more than 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 -20 -10 0 10 20
Bias Endorsement Rate (%) Δ = Split − Naive (pp)
10percentagepointsonthreeoftheeightmodelsweevaluate, † cancellation trap
Naive coding (sel-only) Split coding — open-source → exposed under-estimate
andtherevisionisdirectional:fiveareoverstatedbyselection- Split coding — closed-source ← corrected over-estimate
only coding and three are understated (Fig. 2b). (3)Errors (b) Across eight models, disentangled coding corrects the BER
cancel silently. When a model produces both overestimated produced by naive choice-only coding. Three models deviate by
more than 10 percentage points, and the corrections run in both
andunderestimatedresponsesacrossitems,thetwodirectional
directions: five are overestimated and three underestimated (two fall
errors cancel in the aggregate BER, yielding a score that
into a cancellation trap; mean |∆|=7.5pp).
appears well-calibrated even though the underlying response
Fig. 2: Collapsing a model’s discrete choice and free-text
set is internally inconsistent on a substantial fraction of items.
explanation into a single label masks choice–elaboration dis-
Two of the eight models fall into this configuration (Fig. 2b).
agreements and leads to systematic over- or under-estimation
This failure mode is the most dangerous for compliance
of bias.
auditing: a passing score provides no signal that anything is
wrong.
A trustworthy bias measure must address all three failures
simultaneously. We therefore propose BIAXISAUDIT. On the cellation,weformalisetwocross-layerdisagreementstatistics:
promptside,wetreatformatasanexperimentalvariablealong theInconsistencyRate(IR)formagnitudeandtheDivergence
four dimensions (task, perspective, role, and sentiment) and NetImbalance(DNI)fordirection.Togethertheyconvertaudit
report audit scores as distributions rather than single-point trustworthiness from a rhetorical concern into a quantifiable
estimates. On the response side, Split Coding records the property; in the worst case, neither single-axis failure implies
discreteSelectionandthefree-textElaborationasindependent or bounds the other (Prop. 3, §III-E). The same dimensions
signals whose discrepancy is itself diagnostic. To detect can- that expose bias also provide control handles for mitigation;
accordingly,theinstrumentcandistinguishgenuinebiasreduc- one task yet raises it on another, and the interaction term
tions from apparent ones driven by cross-layer redistribution. accounts for more variance (η2=0.043) than the main effect
We evaluate BIAXISAUDIT on eight large language models, of sentiment alone. This pattern cannot be inferred from the
collecting80,200codedresponsespermodel,andorganizethe per-dimensionanalysisofRQ1,sincetheaverageshiftofeach
analysis around four research questions. RQ1 Does prompt dimension says nothing about how the dimensions behave in
framing materially shift the measured bias of a model on a concert. These findings rest on a 3×2×2×2 sub-factorial (24
fixedstatementpool? RQ2 Dosingle-labelbenchmarkscores cellsof1,296inthefull64 factorial);abalancedfull-factorial
accurately reflect the bias a model actually expresses? RQ3 estimate could in principle reweight which dimensions the
Are the marginal effects of individual prompt dimensions conclusion applies to and is left to future work. The common
sufficienttopredicttheirjointeffect? RQ4 Doesthetwo-axis audit practice of averaging across prompt configurations as
instrument distinguish genuine prompt-level bias reductions a debiasing safeguard therefore pools opposing errors into a
from apparent ones caused by cross-layer redistribution? number whose apparent calibration is incidental rather than
Finding1. Task format accounts for as much variance structural within the dimensions tested.
in bias scores as the choice of model does. On a fixed pool Finding4. The two-axis instrument distinguishes gen-
of stereotype statements, the bias endorsement rate BER uine bias reductions from apparent ones caused by cross-
union
swingsfrom0.06to0.78onasinglemodelasthetaskformat layer redistribution. Under a factorial comparison of task,
alone changes, with task format accounting for η2=0.395 of role, and sentiment interventions, single-scalar audits cannot
the total variance on the OAT grid (Fig. 1). The audit verdict tellapartconfigurationsthatdriveBERdownwithoutflipping
foramodelisthereforeasmuchanartifactofthetaskselected DNI (co-reducing) from those that zero one layer while rout-
by the evaluator as a property of the model itself. ing bias into the other (layer-rerouting). The Pareto-optimal
Finding2. Single-layer audits miss a large, model- configurationweidentifyachievesa96%reductioninBER
sel
dependent fraction of all bias signals, and the two single- and reveals a non-additive task×role interaction invisible to
layer rankings show no significant agreement across our single-axis evaluations; full numbers in §VI.
panel of 8 models. On LLaMA3-70B, BER =13.8% (rank Contributions.
sel
4/8, mid-pack) and BER elab =25.5% (rank 1/8, highest), • We recast bias auditing as a measurement-reliability prob-
with labels assigned by majority vote of three independent lem under an adversarial vendor and introduce BIAXISAU-
LLM judges; the same response set thus receives opposite DIT,thefirstauditinstrumentdesignedtoclosetheprompt-
verdicts under the two single-layer audits, with a model shopping attack surface.
ranking unremarkably on selection turning out to be the
• The instrument pairs an across-prompt OAT grid (4 dimen-
most biased elaborator in the cohort. Across the eight mod-
sions,21conditions)withwithin-responseSplitCoding;the
els, the share of bias signals captured by only one layer
disagreement pair (IR,DNI) exposes the cancellation trap
(IR/BER )averages63.6%,rangingfrom41.8%onGPT-
union any aggregate score obscures.
OSS-20Bto85.2%onGemini3Flash(denominatorasdefined
• Across 8 LLMs and 80,200 coded responses each, task
in Appendix B), suggesting that audit reliability is a model-
format alone shifts BER by up to 0.78, one in five
dependent property rather than a fixed characteristic of the union
responses contradicts its surface label, and prompt factors
instrument. The disagreement is directional: on five models,
interact non-additively—no single-axis report is reliable.
selection-only coding overstates bias (OED>UED); on the
remaining three it understates bias, the security-critical case • A factorial comparison of three prompt-level interventions
shows that the two-axis instrument distinguishes genuine
in which the model commits to a non-stereotyped option
bias reductions from apparent ones driven by cross-layer
but elaborates a stereotyped one. At the per-condition level,
redistribution; the Pareto-optimal configuration achieves
multiple (model, prompt) cells exhibit the cancellation trap
a 96% reduction in BER and reveals a non-additive
(Prop. 2, Fig. 6), where opposing-direction disagreements sel
task×role interaction invisible to single-axis audits.
cancel in DNI while IR remains non-trivial. Across all eight
models, the rank orderings produced by BER and BER
sel elab II. RELATEDWORK
shownosignificantagreement(Spearmanρ=0.238,p=0.570;
A. Bias Auditing as a Pre-Deployment Control
leave-one-out range [−0.143, 0.429]); the wide range reflects
that n=8 is too small to establish either independence or Bias auditing is no longer merely an academic exercise; it
correlation, but it does confirm that single-layer rankings hasbecomepartofbothvoluntarygovernanceframeworksand
provide no robust evidence of cross-instrument agreement. A binding regulatory regimes. The NIST AI Risk Management
vendorwhocontrolswhichlayertheauditorinspectstherefore Framework[20]providesvoluntaryguidanceformanagingAI
controls the verdict, independent of any change to the model. risks,whiletheEUAIAct[21]andISO/IEC42001:2023[29]
Finding3. Prompt-dimension interactions outweigh introduce more formal governance obligations for covered
their corresponding main effects, undermining na¨ıve en- AI systems. This shift is motivated in part by documented
semble averaging across the dimensions tested in our harms in hiring, lending, and content moderation [3], [4], [9],
3×2×2×2 sub-factorial. A skeptical sentiment framing low- [10]. Benchmarks are the main tool for these audits [30]:
ers the bias endorsement rate by 26 percentage points on CrowS-Pairs [22], StereoSet [23], and BBQ [24] set the
earlystandards,whilemore recentwork,includingCEB[25], III. PROBLEMFORMULATION
F2Bench [31], CLEAR-Bias [26], and BVF [32], covers a
broader range of bias types and task formats. As Table I Threat Model. A bias audit functions as a measurement-
shows, however, all share two assumptions that go untested: based security control whose output governs pre-deployment
theprompttemplateistreatedasafixed,neutralmeasurement compliance decisions for high-risk LLM applications; the
instrument,andmodelresponsesarereducedtoasinglelabel. credibility of the compliance score is therefore the primary
BIAXISAUDIT relaxes both by varying prompt format as an asset at risk. To make this threat concrete, consider a hy-
explicit factor (the horizontal axis) and decomposing each pothetical vendor V that deploys identical model weights in
response into selection and elaboration layers (the vertical two regulatory contexts: a high-risk HR system governed by
axis). the EU AI Act, for which Article 15 sets requirements for
robustness and accuracy, and a U.S. risk-management report
B. Prompt Sensitivity and Audit-Score Stability organized under the NIST AI RMF MEASURE function,
specifically MEASURE-2.6 on systematic bias evaluation. In
Prior work has established that LLM benchmark scores
the EU filing, V uses the BJ-self-neutral prompt template and
are unstable under surface-level prompt variation. For LLMs
obtains BERunion ≈ 0.06. In the NIST-aligned report, the
specifically,adversarialpromptperturbationscansubstantially
same vendor evaluates the same model with the CTO-self-
degrade performance [33], formatting choices alone can shift
neutral template and obtains BERunion≈0.78. Both reports
accuracybytensofpointsonchain-of-thoughttasks[28],and
describe “the same model” using a single-template, single-
single-prompt scores can exhibit high variance across seman-
labelbenchmark;bothpasstheirrespectivecompliancethresh-
tically equivalent phrasings [27], [34]. A broader robustness
olds. When the HR system subsequently flags job candidates,
literature further shows that model behavior and evaluation
neithercompliancereportretainsthediagnosticcapacitytode-
outcomes can be highly sensitive to input perturbations, dis-
tecttheroutingofstereotypeendorsementintotheelaboration
tribution shifts, and evaluation protocols across adversarial-
layerorunderspecifictaskformats:thediscriminatorypattern
learningandvision-languagesettings[35]–[41].Thisliterature
is entirely invisible to the audit chain. The attack reduces
framespromptsensitivityprimarilyasapropertyofthemodel
to prompt-shopping: by selecting the prompt subset, task
undertest,however,ratherthanasapropertyoftheevaluation
format, or coding scheme under which a model scores most
instrument.Forsocialbiasauditing,theimplicationisdirect:a
favourably, the vendor can induce a score difference exceed-
single-templatebenchmarkcannotcertifythatitsscorereflects
ing 0.7 between audit instruments evaluated on an identical
the model rather than the template. BIAXISAUDIT opera-
model, causing a biased model to pass a compliance review
tionalizes this concern as the horizontal axis, treating prompt
through instrument selection rather than genuine alignment.
format(task,perspective,role,sentiment)asacontrolledfactor
The integrity asset under attack is the compliance score itself;
and reporting a distribution across 401 templates rather than
the adversary need not modify any model weights—it suffices
a single point estimate.
to control which audit instrument is used. The threat is not a
runtime exploit but a measurement-surface threat: any party
C. Response-LevelDivergencebetweenSelectionandReason-
with influence over the audit protocol can shift the reported
ing
bias without modifying the model itself, whether by selecting
Asecondsourceofauditunreliabilitylieswithinindividual favorable benchmarks, adopting convenient task formats, or
responses.ResearchonreasoningfaithfulnessshowsthatCoT citing whichever score supports their argument. Our goal is
explanationsfrequentlymisrepresentthefactorsdrivingmodel to quantify this measurement surface and report its extent
outputs [42]–[45], and the LLM-as-judge literature has simi- alongside our protocol’s own bias score, making the stability
larly found that label-only coding is itself an unreliable pro- of the reported bias a transparent and auditable property of
cess [46], [47]. For bias auditing, the consequence is direct: a the measurement protocol itself. BIAXISAUDIT closes this
modelmayverballyargueagainstastereotypewhileselecting attack surface directly: the across-prompt axis eliminates the
the stereotyped option, or vice versa, rendering any single- freedomofthevendortoselectwhichevertaskformatismost
labelauditunabletocapturetheexpressedstanceofthemodel. favourable, and the within-response axis removes the freedom
Existingbenchmarkscollapseresponsestoasurfacelabeland to exploit surface-layer coding that disregards the elaboration.
cannot detect this selection–elaboration divergence; faithful- Letsdenoteastereotypestatement,papromptcondition,m
ness benchmarks designed for capability tasks [42], [44] do a model, and y =m(s,p) the resulting response. Our goal is
not apply either, as they ask whether reasoning supports a to measure the stereotype endorsement tendency of model m
correct answer rather than whether it endorses a stereotype. under condition p, rather than to score the response surface
BIAXISAUDIT addresses this via Split Coding, which codes alone.
selection and elaboration independently; the derived statistics Probabilisticsetup.LetS denotethestatementpool.Foreach
(IR,DNI)makeover-andunder-estimationofbiasvisibleand statement–conditionpair(s,p),wedrawK independentmodel
distinguishable from mutual cancellation. responses (in the experiments reported here K = 1, but the
A detailed discussion of how BIAXISAUDIT differs from framework is stated for general K). All probabilities Pr(·) in
each of these lines of work is provided in Appendix D. the BER family, OED, and UED are defined relative to the


=== Defenses Against Prompt Attacks Learn Surface Heuristics.pdf ===
Defenses Against Prompt Attacks Learn Surface Heuristics
ShawnLi1*,ChenxiaoYu1∗,ZhiyuNi2∗,HaoLi3,CharithPeris4,ChaoweiXiao5,YueZhao1
1UniversityofSouthernCalifornia 2UniversityofCalifornia,Berkeley
3 WashingtonUniversityinSt. Louis 4 Amazon 5 JohnsHopkinsUniversity
{li.li02, cyu96374, yue.z}@usc.edu,
zhiyuni@berkeley.edu,
perisc@amazon.com,
chaoweixiao@jhu.edu
Abstract
Position Bias Token Trigger Bias Topic Generalization Bias
Benign
Large language models (LLMs) are increas- In B st e r n u i c g ti n o n Instru A ction Benign In B st e r n u i c g ti n o n Seen-topic Unseen-topic
A Benign Instruction Instruction Instruction
ingly deployed in security-sensitive applica- Instru B ction Prompt + Trigger
tions, where they must follow system- or
Large Language Model
developer-specifiedinstructionsthatdefinethe
i n n i t g e n nd u e s d er t r a e s q k u b e e st h s a . v W ior h , e w n h a i d le ve c r o s m ar p ia l l et i i n n s g tr b u e c - - In A st n r A s u w ct e io r n Ins A t R r n u e s c j w e ti c o e t n r A In A st n r s u w ct e io r n Ins R tr e u je c c ti t on I S n e A s e t c n ru c -t c e o t p i p t o i n c U I n n s s R e tr e e u j n e c - c t t i o t o p n ic
Instruction B
tions appear in user queries or externally re-
Rejected if Trigger token Topic not present
trievedcontent,modelsmayoverrideintended instruction appears frequently seen in in training look
late in prompt attack data suspicious
logic. Recentdefensesrelyonsupervisedfine-
tuning with benign and malicious labels. Al-
though these methods achieve high attack re- Figure1:Threeshortcutbehaviorslearnedbyfine-tuned
jectionrates,wefindthattheyrelyonnarrow defenses: position-based rejection of later segments,
correlationsindefensedataratherthanharmful token-triggeredrejectioncausedbytokenscommonin
intent,leadingtosystematicrejectionofsafe attacksamples, andover-rejectionofbenignprompts
inputs. We analyze three recurring shortcut fromunseentopics. Thesepatternsindicaterelianceon
behaviorsinducedbydefensefine-tuning. Po- surfacecuesinsteadofintent.
sitionbiasariseswhenbenigncontentplaced
later in a prompt is rejected at much higher retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) pipelines,
rates;acrossreasoningbenchmarks,suffix-task enterprisesearch,andagent-basedautomation. In
rejectionrisesfrombelow10%toashighas
theseapplications,modelsareexpectedtofollow
90%. Tokentriggerbiasoccurswhenstrings
system-ordeveloper-specifiedinstructionswhile
commoninattackdataraiserejectionprobabil-
reliablycompletingbenignuserrequests. Thisas-
ityeveninbenigncontexts;insertingasingle
triggertokenincreasesfalserefusalsbyupto sumptionbreakswhenadversarialinstructionsen-
50%. Topicgeneralizationbiasreflectspoor terthepipeline,eitherdirectlythroughuserqueries
generalizationbeyondthedefensedatadistribu- or indirectly via externally retrieved content. In
tion,withdefendedmodelssufferingtest-time such cases, the model may ignore its intended
accuracydropsofupto40%. Thesefindings
logicandexecuteinjectedcommands,avulnerabil-
suggestthatcurrentprompt-injectiondefenses
ityknownaspromptinjection(PerezandRibeiro,
frequently respond to attack-like surface pat-
2022; Greshake et al., 2023; Shawn et al., 2025;
ternsratherthantheunderlyingintent. Wein-
Liuetal.,2024;Yietal.,2025). AsLLMsincreas-
troduce controlled diagnostic datasets and a
systematicevaluationacrosstwobasemodels ingly operate with sufficient autonomy, a single
and multiple defense pipelines, highlighting safetyfailurecanimmediatelytriggerunintended
limitations of supervised fine-tuning for reli- real-worldactions.
ableLLMsecurity. 1
A common defense against prompt injection
is supervised fine-tuning. Recent approaches,
1 Introduction
including StrucQ (Chen et al., 2025a) and Se-
Large language models are widely deployed in cAlign(Chenetal.,2024),trainmodelsonlabeled
security-criticalsettingssuchascustomersupport, datasets that distinguish benign prompts from at-
tacks, encouraging rejection when inputs resem-
*EqualContribution
ble known attack patterns. In practice, however,
1Our code and data are available at: https://github.
com/AiChiMoCha/MEval/tree/main thedefensedataisdominatedbyexplicitinjection
6202
naJ
21
]RC.sc[
1v58170.1062:viXra
demonstrations such as instruction overrides, de- sharp and consistent bias effects. Suffix-task re-
limiterescapes,andhandcrafted“ignoreprevious jection rises from below 10% to as high as 90%
message”patterns(PerezandRibeiro,2022;Willi- afterdefensefine-tuning;insertingasingletrigger
son,2023). Asaresult,defendedmodelsachieve tokenincreasesfalserefusalsbyupto50%,while
highattackrejectionratesonstandardbenchmarks, matchednon-triggercontrolsdonot;anddefended
whichareoftentakenasevidenceofrobustness. modelsincurtest-timeaccuracydropsofupto40%
Empirical behavior reveals a different picture. acrossdiversereasoningbenchmarks.
Ratherthandetectingharmfulintent,fine-tunedde- Ourcontributionsaresummarizedasfollows:
fensesrelyonnarrowstructuralregularitiespresent
inthedefensedata,leadingtosystematicrejection • Astructuredanalysisoffine-tunedprompt-
of safe inputs. We identify three recurring fail- injectiondefenses,showingthatmodernsu-
ure modes. First, models treat later portions of a perviseddefensepipelinessystematicallyrely
promptasinherentlysuspicious,rejectingbenign onsurfacepatternsinsteadofdetectingmali-
contentsolelyduetoitsposition. Second,rejection ciousintent.
probabilityincreaseswhenbenignpromptscontain
• A structured characterization of shortcut
tokens frequently seen in attack data, even when
failure behaviors, capturing position-based
those tokens are semantically harmless. Third,
rejection,token-triggersensitivity,andtopic
models generalize poorly to topical domains ab-
generalizationfailure.
sentfromthedefensedataset,exhibitingelevated
rejection or degraded performance on benign in-
• A comprehensive diagnostic evaluation
putsfromunfamiliardomains. Thesefailuresarise
acrosstwobasemodelsandmultipledefense
from reliance on surface-level correlations rather
pipelines, revealing consistent safety–utility
than intent-aware reasoning, consistent with ob-
trade-offsthatarepreviouslyhiddenbycon-
servations in recent studies on over-defense and
ventionalbenchmarks.
prompt guard behavior (Li and Liu, 2024; Han
etal.,2024a).
2 RelatedWork
Weformalizethesesystematicbehaviorsasthree
shortcut biases, each describing a rule that the 2.1 PromptInjection
defendedmodelappliesduringrejectionindepen-
Prompt injection (PI) refers to attacks in which
dentlyoftheprompt’ssemanticintent.
adversarialinstructionsareinterleavedwithbenign
Bias1(PositionBias). Adefendedmodelexhibits
content,causinglargelanguagemodelstofollow
position bias when the probability of rejecting a
attackerintentratherthantheintendedapplication
benign segment increases solely because the seg-
logic (Greshake et al., 2023; Yi et al., 2025; Liu
mentappearslaterinamulti-segmentprompt,even
etal.,2024). Priorworkcommonlydistinguishes
thoughallsegmentsencodebenignintent.
betweendirectandindirectthreatmodelsbasedon
Bias2(TokenTriggerBias). Adefendedmodel theattacker’scontrolchannel.
exhibitstokentriggerbiaswheninsertingaspecific direct prompt injection. Attacker directly sup-
string that frequently appears in attack examples plies malicious instructions through user-visible
increases rejection probability, regardless of the inputs(PerezandRibeiro,2022).
string’ssemanticroleintheprompt. Indirect prompt injection. Adversarial instruc-
tionsareembeddedintoexternalcontentretrieved
Bias3(TopicGeneralizationBias). Adefended
byanotherwisebenignsystem,suchaswebpages
modelexhibitstopicgeneralizationbiaswhenbe-
ordocuments,andinfluencemodelbehaviorduring
nign prompts from topical domains absent in the
downstreamprocessing(Chenetal.,2024,2025b).
defense fine-tuning data experience substantially
degradedtaskperformancecomparedtoprompts Althoughthesesettingsdifferindeploymentas-
drawnfromknowndomains. sumptions,bothrelyontextualpatternsthatover-
Toisolatetheseeffects,weconstructcontrolled rideorcompetewithintendedinstructions.
diagnostic settings in which semantic intent re-
2.2 Model-levelPromptInjectionDefenses
mainsbenignwhileexactlyonefactor—position,
token identity, or topical domain—is varied. A range of model-level defenses have been pro-
Acrossthesesettings,fine-tuneddefensesexhibit posedtoreducesusceptibilitytopromptinjection.
Constitutional AI (Bai et al., 2022) and delibera- thetrainingobjectivecanbeminimizedbyrelying
tivealignment(Guanetal.,2024)encouragemod- onϕ(x)insteadoftheactualmaliciousintent. This
elstoreasonexplicitlyaboutsafetyconstraintsat mayleadthedefendedmodeltoadoptadecision
generation time. Other approaches modify train- ruleoftheform:
ing data or objectives to bias models toward se-
f (x) = reject wheneverϕ(x)isactive,
curebehavior,includingstructuredpromptingand
θ′
fine-tuning strategies such as StruQ (Chen et al., eventhoughthepromptisentirelybenign.
2025a),SecAlign(Chenetal.,2024),andMetaSe-
3.2 FailureHypothesis
cAlign(Chenetal.,2025b). Instruction-hierarchy
methodsfurtheraimtoenforcepriorityorderingbe- Supervisedfine-tuningonD def isintendedtosep-
tweenprivilegedinstructionsanduserinputs(Wal- aratebenignfromattackprompts. Whenattack
laceetal., 2024;Wuetal.,2024). More detailed samplesinD def displaylimitedstructuraldiversity,
literaturereviewcanbefoundinAppendixA. the model may instead learn correlations tied to
surfacepatterns. Letϕ(x)againdenotesuchasur-
3 ProblemStatementandFailure faceattribute. Ourgeneralhypothesisisthatmany
Hypothesis defendedmodelsbehaveas
3.1 ProblemStatement f (x) = reject wheneverϕ(x)ispresent,
θ′
LetX denotethespaceofinputpromptsandY the even though x has no harmful intention. We for-
space of model outputs. A base language model malizethisbehaviorthroughthreehypotheses.
with parameters θ is a function f : X → Y. A
θ
H1 (Position Bias). Consider a concatenated
defendedmodelf isobtainedbysupervisedfine-
θ′
prompt x = [x ;x ] consisting of two indepen-
tuningonadataset A B
dentbenigntasks. Bothx andx containnoma-
A B
D = {(x ,z )}N , liciousobjective. Acorrectdefenseshouldanswer
def i i i=1
x normally. However, if the model has learned
B
where each x ∈ X is assigned a label z ∈ to associate the later portion of a prompt with at-
i i
{benign,attack}. tacks,therejectionprobabilityforthesecondtask
Adefendedmodelshouldthereforesatisfy: becomesunexpectedlyhigh:
P (cid:0) f (x) = reject | x ∈ X (cid:1) ishigh, P(reject | x B )islargedespitex B beingbenign.
θ′ inj
This behavior indicates that the model treats the
(cid:0) (cid:1)
P f θ′ (x) = reject | x ∈ X benign islow, suffixofapromptaslikelytocontainharmfulcon-
(cid:0) (cid:1) tent.
P f (x) = reject islow,
x∼X
OOD-benign
θ′
H2(TokenTriggerBias). LetT beasetofstring
Acc (f ) ≈ Acc (f ).
X OOD-benign θ′ X benign θ′ formsthatfrequentlyappearinattackexamplesin
Trainingobjective. Supervisedfine-tuningadjusts D def . Forabenignpromptx,thepresenceofany
θ toθ′ byminimizingempiricalrisk: t ∈ T raisestherejectionprobability:
min E (cid:2) ℓ (cid:0) f (x),z (cid:1)(cid:3) , P(reject | t ∈ x) > P(reject | t ∈/ x).
(x,z)∼D θ′
θ′ def
H3 (Topic Generalization Bias). Let T de-
train
whereℓisalossthatencouragesthemodeltopre- notethetopicaldomainsrepresentedinD def ,and
dictbenignorattackcorrectly. Inmanydefense let T test be a set of unseen domains. For benign
datasets,attackexamplesfollownarrowstructural promptsdrawnfromT test ,thedefendedmodelex-
patterns,suchasappearinginlatersegmentsofa hibitsasignificantdegradationintaskperformance
prompt, containingparticularstringforms, orbe- comparedtopromptsdrawnfromT train :
longingtoasmallsetoftopics. E [Acc(f (x))] < E [Acc(f (x))].
Let ϕ(x) be a surface feature of a prompt (for
x∼Ttest θ′ x∼T
train
θ′
example,itspositioninthesequence,thepresence Thesehypothesesexpresshowadefendedmodel
ofspecifictokens,oritstopicdomain). When mayrejectsafepromptsbasedonpatternslearned
from fine-tuning data rather than the underlying
I(ϕ(x);z) ≫ I(semanticintent(x);z), taskintent.
80
60
40
20
0
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200
Response token count
ycneuqerF
Token Length Distribution
Original
140
Fine-tuned
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0 100 200 300 400
Response token count
(a)GPQA(ExpertReasoning)
ycneuqerF
Token Length Distribution
Original
Fine-tuned
(b)MMLU(GeneralKnowledge)
Figure2: ReasoningCollapseviaOutputLengthDistribution. Weplotthehistogramofgeneratedtokenlengths
for Llama-3 Base (Blue) vs. StrucQ Defended Llama-3 (Orange) models across GPQA and MMLU datasets.
WhiletheBasemodelexhibitsalong-taildistributioncharacteristicofdeepChain-of-Thought(CoT)reasoning,
theDefendedmodelsshowadistinctleftwardshift,indicatingasuppressionofreasoningsteps. This"truncation
effect"explainstheutilitydropobservedinTab.1,asdefenseserroneouslycurtailcomplexbenigngenerationpaths.
3.3 DiagnosticDatasetDesign Keyword Trigger Set (for H2). For a benign
prompt x, we generate a pair (x,x+t) where x+t
To evaluate the hypotheses in a controlled man-
isformedbyinsertingatokent ∈ T atasyntacti-
ner, we construct diagnostic datasets that isolate
callyvalidlocation(e.g.,"sudo","override"). We
eachfactorinH1-H3whileremovingallmalicious
alsogenerateacontrolpromptx+r byinsertinga
intent. Each dataset is designed so that semantic
randomtechnicaltermrofsimilarlengthandPOS.
intentremainsbenign;onlyasinglesurfacefeature
Onlythepresenceoftshouldaffectrejectionifthe
is varied. This makes the evaluation resemble a
defensereliesontokentriggers:
controlled experiment where a single variable is
manipulatedwhileallotheraspectsremainfixed. P(reject | x+t) ≫ P(reject | x) ≈ P(reject | x+r).
Position Stress Set (for H1). To examine Topic Generalization Set (for H3). We divide
whether fine-tuned defenses treat later parts of a benign tasks into a training-topic set T and
train
promptassuspiciousbydefault,webuildinputsby a held-out set T that shares limited overlap.
test
concatenatingtwoindependentlysampledbenign Promptsaredrawnindependentlyfromeachtopic
tasks,writtenasx = [x A ;x B ],wherebothx A and group,ensuringthatlanguagecomplexityandtask
x B containnomaliciousintentandcomefromdo- types remain matched. Intuitively, if the defense
mainsunrelatedtoattackdata. Acorrectdefense overfits to topics seen during fine-tuning, it will
shouldhandlebothtasksnormally. generalizepoorlytobenignpromptsfromunseen
Empirically,weobservethatthedefendedmodel domains, leading to a significant degradation in
frequentlyrejectsthesecondtaskx B eventhough taskperformanceonT test comparedtoT train :
it is fully benign. This behavior is captured by a
highrejectionprobability Acc Ttest (f θ′ ) < Acc T
train
(f θ′ ).
Together, these three datasets enable targeted
P(reject | x ),
B
measurement of how strongly a defended model
relies on positional structure, token identities, or
whilethesamemodelshowslowrejectiononsingle
topicalfamiliarityinitsrejectiondecisions.
benign tasks. This indicates that the defense has
learnedtoassociatethelatterportionofaprompt 4 Experiment
with attack patterns, despite the absence of any
harmfulintentinx . 4.1 ExperimentalSetup
B
Thisdatasettherefore,testswhetherthemodel Base models. We evaluate two open-weight
treatsthesuffixofapromptasanimplicit“attack LLM families: Llama 3 (Dubey et al., 2024) and
region,” a behavior consistent with position bias Mistral(Jiangetal.,2023). Bothmodelsareusedin
inducedduringfine-tuning. theirinstruction-tunedvariantswithoutadditional


=== Disentangling Length Bias In Preference Learning Via Response-Conditioned Modeling.pdf ===
Disentangling Length Bias in Preference Learning via
Response-Conditioned Modeling
JianfengCai† JinhuaZhu*† RuopeiSun†
YueWang‡ LiLi† WengangZhou† HouqiangLi†
† UniversityofScienceandTechnologyofChina
‡ IndependentResearcher
{xiaobaicai,teslazhu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
Abstract etal.,2024),complexplanning(Haoetal.,2023;
Zhaoetal.,2024),mathematicalreasoning(Imani
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feed-
et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023), and so on. Within
back (RLHF) has achieved considerable suc-
thisframework,preferencelearningplaysapivotal
cessinaligninglargelanguagemodels(LLMs)
bymodelinghumanpreferenceswithalearn- rolebyusingageneralizablemodelasaproxyfor
ablerewardmodelandemployingareinforce- humanpreferencesandoptimizinglargelanguage
ment learning algorithm to maximize the re- models (LLMs) based on this preference model.
ward model’s scores. However, these reward However, a significant challenge in RLHF is the
modelsaresusceptibletoexploitationthrough
phenomenon termed reward overoptimization or
various superficial confounding factors, with
hacking (Gao et al., 2023). This occurs when ex-
length bias emerging as a particularly sig-
cessiveoptimizationagainstthepreferencemodel
nificant concern. Moreover, while the pro-
underminestheattainmentofthetrueobjective. As nounced impact of length bias on preference
modeling suggests that LLMs possess an in- aresult,LLMsmaylearntoexploitsimplercriteria
herentsensitivitytolengthperception,ourpre- suchaslength,bulletpoints,orpoliteness(Ramé
liminary investigations reveal that fine-tuned etal.,2024),ratherthanmorecausalandnuanced
LLMs consistently struggle to adhere to ex-
indicatorstoachievehigherreward.
plicit length instructions. To address these
Amongtheserewardhackingphenomena,length
twolimitations,weproposeanovelframework
bias stands out as both a prevalent and challeng-
whereintherewardmodelexplicitlydifferen-
ingissues(Duboisetal.,2024a),andweidentify
tiates between human semantic preferences
andresponselengthrequirements. Specifically, it as a representative test bed, with the expecta-
weintroduceaResponse-conditionedBradley- tionthatourapproachcanbereadilyextendedto
Terry(Rc-BT)modelthatenhancesthemodel’s address other spurious correlations. To mitigate
capabilityinlengthbiasmitigatingandlength length bias in the RLHF pipeline, two primary
instructionfollowing,throughtrainingonour
strategies have emerged, which may be comple-
augmenteddataset. Furthermore,wepropose
mentary: The first strategy focuses on rectifying
theRc-RMandRc-DPOalgorithmtoleverage
thepolicyoptimizationprocessthroughtechniques
theRc-BTmodelforrewardmodelinganddi-
suchasincreasingtheKLpenaltycoefficient,ap-
rectpolicyoptimization(DPO)ofLLMs,simul-
taneouslymitigatinglengthbiasandpromoting plyinglengthpenaltyrewards(Singhaletal.,2023),
adherencetolengthinstructions. Extensiveex- rewardclipping(Chenetal.,2024b),andvarious
perimentsacrossvariousfoundationalmodels hyper-parametertuningmethods. Thesecondstrat-
anddatasetsdemonstratetheeffectivenessand
egy aims to disentangle length information from
generalizabilityofourapproach.
qualityinrewardmodeling. Thisincludeslength
1 Introduction balancing,rewarddataaugmentation,confidence-
based truncation in training data (Singhal et al.,
Reinforcement learning from human feedback
2023),andusingsophisticatedtrainingobjectives
(RLHF)(Ziegleretal.,2019;Stiennonetal.,2020;
toseparatelengthinformation(Chenetal.,2024b).
Ouyang et al., 2022) has revolutionized the field
Despitetheseadvances,weobserveseveraldraw-
ofnaturallanguageprocessing,enablingadvance-
backs in these methods. First, rectification meth-
ments in areas such as conversation (Bai et al.,
odsforpolicyoptimizationaresensitivetohyper-
2022a),codegeneration(Poesiaetal.,2022;Jiang
parameter changes and foundational model vari-
*Correspondingauthor. ations, and prior work demonstrates that their ef-
1
5202
yaM
91
]GL.sc[
2v41800.2052:viXra
fectiveness is limited (Singhal et al., 2023; Chen methodacrossmultiplemodelsanddatasets.
etal.,2024b). Thesecondcategoryshowssuperior
performancecomparedtothefirst;however,over- 2 RelatedWork
parameterization of the two branches can cause
Inthissection,webrieflyintroducethebackground
unstable optimization (Kurach et al., 2019), and
ofRLHF,rewardhackingandlengthinstructionfol-
regularizationmethodsthatencouragelinearirrele-
lowing. AmoredetailedversionisinAppendixA.
vancemaynotguaranteetrueindependence(Shi-
mony, 1993). Furthermore, ignoring the biased ReinforcementLearningFromHumanFeed-
nature of the training data and forcing an irrele- back. RLHF(Ziegleretal.,2019)involvestraining
vancy or orthogonality between response quality arewardmodeltoapproximatehumanpreferences
andresponselengthisnotalwaysreasonable. For and optimizing the LLMs through reinforcement
instance, in some instruction-following datasets, learning (RL) (Schulman et al., 2017). However,
suchaslengthinstructiondataset,responselength thisapproachsuffersfromtraininginstabilityand
may indeed be a factor of response quality. Fi- requirescarefultuningofnumeroushyperparame-
nally,thesemethodsregardlengthinformationas ters. Recentdirectpreferencealignmentmethods,
harmfulandaimtominimizeitsinfluenceonthe particularly DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024), offer a
instruction-followingability. However,whetherwe more stable alternative. By reformulating the re-
couldleveragetheselengthbiasesforbetterprefer- ward function, DPO eliminates the need for an
encemodelingremainsanunderexploredquestion. onlinerewardmodel,enablingrobustofflineprefer-
Basedontheaforementionedobservations,we encelearning(Hongetal.,2024;Chenetal.,2024a;
aim to improve preference modeling by leverag- Ethayarajhetal.,2024). Ourmethodnotonlyen-
ing response length information and propose a hancesRLHFbyimprovingrewardmodelbutalso
novel approach that allows the preference model seamlesslyintegratesintotheDPOframework.
toexplicitlydifferentiatebetweenhumansemantic Reward Hacking. RLHF is vulnerable to re-
intent and response length instructions. Specifi- wardhacking,whereLLMsexploitinherentbiases
cally,wefirstdevelopanaugmentedlengthinstruc- in the proxy preference model to achieve higher
tion dataset derived from the original preference scores(Panetal.,2022;Casperetal.,2023;Lam-
dataset. Subsequently, we introduce a Response- bert and Calandra, 2023). This phenomenon per-
conditionedBradley-Terry(Rc-BT)model,which sists in DPO, primarily arising from task com-
improvesthemodel’sabilitytomitigatelengthbias plexity, evaluation limitations, and biased feed-
andfollowlengthinstructions. back(Duboisetal.,2024b). Onecommonformof
Giventhewidespreaduseofpaireddataprefer- rewardhackingislengthbias(Singhaletal.,2023;
encemodelinginRLHF,ourmethodcanbeseam- Parketal.,2024),whereinmodelsfavorlongerre-
lesslyintegratedintoboththerewardmodelingand sponsesregardlessofsemanticquality. Previousat-
policy optimization stages. First, we empirically temptstoaddressthisissueincludeODIN’s(Chen
verifyourmethodintherewardmodelingtask. The etal.,2024b)lengthregularizationinrewardmod-
results demonstrate that our method not only en- eling;dual-modeltrainingwithdifferentlearning
hancestherewardmodel’sabilitytomitigatelength rates(Shenetal.,2023);andDPOobjectivemodi-
bias,therebyimprovingitsalignmentwithhuman ficationwithlengthpenalties(Parketal.,2024). In
semanticquality,butalsostrengthensitsadherence contrasttothesemethodsthatsuppresslengthinfor-
tolengthinstructions. Furthermore,applyingour mation,ourmethodenablesmodelstodistinguish
method to direct preference optimization (DPO) between semantic intent and length instructions,
(Rafailov et al., 2024), a popular alignment algo- preservingbothaspectsinabalancedmanner.
rithm,furthervalidatesitseffectiveness. LengthInstructionFollowing. CurrentLLMs
Our contributions are summarized as follows: can respond to qualitative length descriptors like
(1)WeproposetheResponse-conditionedBradley- "concise" or "verbose" but struggle with explicit
Terrymethodtomitigatelengthbiasandenhance numerical constraints such as "150 words or
themodel’scapacitytofollowlengthinstructions. less" (Yuan et al., 2024). Although LIFT (Yuan
(2) We show that our method can be integrated etal.,2024)improveslengthinstructionadherence
intorewardmodelingandpolicyoptimizationwith throughspecializeddatasets,thisapproachcompro-
minimaladjustments. (3)Experimentalresultsil- misessemanticquality,resultingindegradedover-
lustratethesuperiorityandgeneralizabilityofour allperformance. Ourmethod,incontrast,achieves
2
effectivelengthinstructionfollowingwhilesimul- prompts. This suggests that the models’ prefer-
taneouslyenhancingsemanticquality. encesarenotprimarilydrivenbytheprompts.
We further plot the relationship between re-
3 PreliminaryExplorations
sponse length and reward score for the reward
model across , e , and r , as shown
Inthissection,weconductseveralpreliminaryin- D eval Deval Deval
inFigure1. Astronglinearcorrelationisobserved,
vestigations into the ability of LLMs to perceive
suggesting that the reward model heavily relies
andprocesslengthinformation,withanemphasis
onresponselengthasacriterionforevaluatingre-
ontherewardmodel. FollowingYuanetal.(2024),
sponsequality. Thesefindingsprovidecompelling
we utilize the OpenAssistant dataset (Köpf et al.,
evidenceoflengthbiasintherewardmodels. More
2024),whichispartitionedintothreesubsets:
sft
D detailedanalysiscanbefoundinAppendixD.1.
forsupervisedfine-tuning(SFT), forreward
rm
D
model (RM) training, and for RM evalua-
D eval 3.2 LengthBiasinEvaluationDataset
tion. Additionally, we employ a range of models
for subsequent experimental analyses, including Here,weaimtoverifywhethertheinitialevalua-
Qwen2-1.5B,Qwen2.5-7B,andLlama-3.1-8B.De- tiondataset eval exhibitslengthbias,whichcould
D
tailsofthetrainingandevaluationproceduresfor hinder its ability to accurately evaluate the true
thissectionareprovidedinAppendixC. performance of the reward models. Specifically,
ouranalysisrevealsthat59.78%ofthechosenre-
3.1 LengthBiasIndeedExists sponsesin arelongerthanthecorresponding
eval
D
Toverifythepresenceoflengthbiasinrewardmod- rejectedresponses. Consequently,thislengthbias
els trained on = (x(i),y (i) ,y (i) ) , where allowsthemodeltoattainanaccuracynearing60%
x(i) is the prom D p r t m and r { esponse w y (i) l is p } referred merelybyfavoringlongerresponses,resultinginan
w
unreliableevaluationofthemodel’sperformance.
(i)
toy accordingtohumanannotations,wedesign
l Tofairlyandaccuratelyassessthesemanticqual-
twoadditionalevaluationsettingsbasedon :
D eval ity of the reward model, we reconstruct the qual-
1. w Ea it c h h a p n r e o m m p p t t y x p ( r i o ) m w p i t th x in = D " e e va m l p i t s y r p e r p o l m ac p e t" d , i a t n y a e u v t a o l m ua a t t i e o d n p d r a o ta c s e e s t s. D S e q v p a e l c f i r fi o c m all D y, ev w a e l t e h m ro p u l g o h y
e
formingtheemptyevaluationdataset e ; GPT-4o (Hurst et al., 2024) to transform each
Deval
triplet(x,y ,y )in intotwodistincttriplets
w l eval
2. Each prompt x(i) is randomly replaced with (x,y1,y1) and (x,y D 2,y2). These newly gener-
w l w l
anotherpromptx(j) (wherei = j)1,resulting atedtripletsadheretothelengthconstraints y1 >
intherandomevaluationdata ̸ set r . y1 2 and y2 < y2 ,whileensuringthaty | 1 l a | nd
Deval | w| | l| | w| w
y2,aswellasy1 andy2,remainsemanticallysimi-
Table 1 reports the evaluation results. Despite w l l
lartotheoriginaly andy . Thedetailedgenera-
w l
the semantic mismatch between responses and
tionprocessisdocumentedinAppendixC.2.
promptsin e and r ,therewardmodelnev-
Deval Deval The reconstructed evaluation dataset q
erthelessattainsrelativelyhighaccuracyonthese Deval
demonstratessignificantimprovementinmitigating
datasets. Specifically,nearlyallmodelsachievean
theinherentlengthbiasin ,therebyfacilitat-
accuracy exceeding 60%, which is very close to D eval
ing a more objective comparison among diverse
theaccuracyobservedontheoriginaldataset .
D eval reward models. As evidenced in Table 3, under
Thisfindingsuggeststhatthereisasignificantbias
thislessbiasedevaluationdataset,Baselinemodels
in the models towards preferring y , even when
w exhibitnotablyreducedperformancemetrics,with
bothresponsesaremisalignedwiththeprompt.
themajorityofaccuracyscoresnotexceeding60%.
Next, we examine the consistency of evalua-
Furtheranalysisof q isinAppendixD.2.
tionresultsacrossdifferentrewardmodelsbetween Deval
e (or r )and ,withaparticularfocus
Deval Deval D eval 3.3 LengthBiasedRewardModelShow
ontheinfluenceofvaryingpromptsonthemodel’s
LimitedAdherencetoLengthInstructions
preferences. Theresults, asshowninTable1, re-
The reward model demonstrates the length bias,
vealthatthemodelsexhibitthesamepreferencefor
indicating its ability to perceive response length.
responses in over 85% of cases, despite different
However,thequestionremainswhetheritcanapply
1For clarity of notation, we omit the superscript (i) in
subsequentdiscussionswherenoambiguityexists. 2|y|denotesthelengthofagivenresponsey.
3
Table1: Evaluationresultsofrewardmodels(Baseline)ondifferentevaluationdatasets , e and r .
D eval Deval Deval
Accuracy(%) Consistency(%)
Model
e r e ( r )
D eval Deval Deval Deval Deval
Qwen2-1.5B-Base 63.86 64.13 64.40 89.40(87.34)
Qwen2-1.5B-Instruct 62.77 65.22 60.87 92.12(90.42)
Qwen2.5-7B-Base 57.07 60.05 60.33 88.32(90.13)
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct 63.04 62.23 60.60 88.60(89.85)
Llama-3.1-8B-Base 56.25 60.05 61.41 89.40(85.24)
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct 57.88 58.15 56.25 88.59(87.26)
11
10
9
8
7
6
0 250 500 750 1000
ResponseLength
erocSMR
11
10
9
8
7
Qwen2-1.5B-Instruct
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct 6
0 250 500 750 1000
ResponseLength
(a) OriginalevaluationdatasetD
eval
erocSMR
11
10
9
8
Qwen2-1.5B-Instruct 7
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
6
0 250 500 750 1000
ResponseLength
(b) EmptyevaluationdatasetDe
eval
erocSMR
Qwen2-1.5B-Instruct
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
(c) RandomevaluationdatasetDr
eval
Figure1: Therelationshipsbetweenresponselengthsandscoresofrewardmodels(Baseline)trainedwithQwen2-
1.5B-InstructandLlama-3.1-8B-Instruct,evaluatedondifferentevaluationdatasets,revealaseverelengthbias.
this ability to follow length instruction x , where rectlyondataformattedas x ,y ,y . Toexam-
l l w l
{ }
x = lengthconstraint+x. Forsimplicity,weuse ine the effectiveness of this intuitive format, we
l
the same length constraint as LIFT (Yuan et al., extend LIFT (Yuan et al., 2024) to create LIFT-
2024),whichspecifiedbyword_num,asdetailed plusbyincorporatingminimumlengthconstraints
in Appendix C.4. To validate this, we construct ("ormore"lengthinstruction)alongsideitsoriginal
thelengthevaluationdataset l basedon q , maximum length constraints ("or less" length in-
Deval Deval
wherebothresponsessemanticallysatisfyxinx , struction). Wethenconstructthreevariantdatasets:
l
butonlyoneadherestothelengthconstraint. Ap- 1)LIFT-plusreverse,whichreversesthepreference
2
pendixC.3formoreconstructiondetails. orderbetweenchosenandrejectedresponsesbased
Whenevaluatedon l (resultsshowninTable onlengthconstraints;2)LIFT-plusnoreverse,which
Deval 2
8,Baseline),allmodelsdemonstratetheaccuracy preservestheoriginalpreferenceordering;and3)
closeto50%,nobetterthanchance. Thisdemon- LIFT-plusempty,wheresubstitutesxinx withan
2 l
stratesthatmodelswithlengthbiasareunableto emptypromptx whilemaintainingthepreference
e
applythisabilitytofollowlengthinstructions. order, examines the impact of semantic prompts
This finding suggests that reward models un- onlengthinstructionfollowing. Thecompletecon-
consciouslyacquirelengthbiasduringpreference structionprocessisdetailedinAppendixC.4.
learningwithoutexplicitawarenessoflengthasa
EmpiricalresultspresentedinTable7(Appendix
measurableattribute. Wehypothesize: Couldex-
D.3)revealthatwhilemodelsdemonstratenotably
plicitlengthinstructionlearningenablemodels higheraccuracyon l ,theyachievediminished
todevelopclearperceptionofresponselength, accuracyon q c D om ev p al aredtotheBaselineinTa-
therebymitigatingundesiredlengthbias? Based
Deval
ble 3. This performance disparity suggests that
on this, we propose incorporating length con-
reward models prioritize length instruction com-
straints into the training process to transform im-
plianceattheexpenseofsemanticunderstanding.
plicitlengthbiasintoexplicitlengthunderstanding.
Furthermore,ouranalysisofaccuracytrajectories
acrosstrainingsteps(Figure5,AppendixD.3)indi-
3.4 LengthInstructionsAreEasilyLearned
catesasimilarpattern: accuracyon l exhibits
The most straightforward approach to explicit rapidimprovement,whileaccuracyo D n eva q l shows
Deval
length instruction learning would be training di- initialimprovementfollowedbydeterioration.
4


=== Dissecting Human and LLM Preferences.pdf ===
Generative AI Research
Dissecting Human and LLM Preferences
JunlongLi1,4 FanZhou1,2,4 ShichaoSun3,4 YikaiZhang1,4 HaiZhao1 PengfeiLiu1,2,4*
1ShanghaiJiaoTongUniversity 2ShanghaiArtificialIntelligenceLaboratory
3HongKongPolytechnicUniversity 4GenerativeAIResearchLab(GAIR)
lockonn@sjtu.edu.cn, pengfei@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
Asarelativequalitycomparisonofmodelresponses,humanandLargeLanguageModel(LLM)preferences
serveascommonalignmentgoalsinmodelfine-tuningandcriteriainevaluation. Yet,thesepreferences
merelyreflectbroadtendencies,resultinginlessexplainableandcontrollablemodelswithpotentialsafety
risks. In this work, we dissect the preferences of human and 32 different LLMs to understand their
quantitativecomposition,usingannotationsfromreal-worlduser-modelconversationsforafine-grained,
scenario-wiseanalysis. Wefindthathumansarelesssensitivetoerrors,favorresponsesthatsupporttheir
stances, and show clear dislike whenmodels admittheirlimits. Onthecontrary, advanced LLMslike
GPT-4-Turboemphasizecorrectness,clarity,andharmlessnessmore. Additionally,LLMsofsimilarsizes
tendtoexhibitsimilarpreferences,regardlessoftheirtrainingmethods,andfine-tuningforalignmentdoes
notsignificantlyalterthepreferencesofpretrained-onlyLLMs. Finally,weshowthatpreference-based
evaluationcanbeintentionallymanipulated. Inbothtraining-freeandtraining-basedsettings,aligninga
modelwiththepreferencesofjudgesboostsscores,whileinjectingtheleastpreferredpropertieslowers
them. Thisresultsinnotablescoreshifts: upto0.59onMT-Bench(1-10scale)and31.94onAlpacaEval
2.0(0-100scale),highlightingthesignificantimpactofthisstrategicadaptation.
InteractiveDemo:https://huggingface.co/spaces/GAIR/Preference-Dissection-Visualization
Dataset: https://huggingface.co/datasets/GAIR/preference-dissection
Code: https://github.com/GAIR-NLP/Preference-Dissection
Prefer
Neutral
Dislike
Figure1: Thepreferencedissectionofhuman,GPT-4-TurboandLLaMA-2-70B-ChatonCommunicationScenario
(includingchitchatandvaluejudgment),andwehighlightthemostpreferredpropertyforeachinitscorresponding
color: lengthyforhuman,nosevereerrorsforGPT-4-Turbo,andcontainrichinfoforLLaMA-2-70B-Chat. The
valueistheprobabilityofaresponsebeingpreferredinapairwhenitsatisfiesonepropertybetterthantheother
response,holdingallelseequal. ThiscanbeinterpretedashowmuchhumanoranLLMfavoracertainproperty.
Valuesaboveandbelowthe50%lineindicateapreferenceordislike,respectively.
* Correspondingauthor
1
4202
beF
71
]LC.sc[
1v69211.2042:viXra
1 Introduction
HumanandLLMpreferenceshaveplayedacrucialroleinthedevelopmentpipelineofrecentadvancedlanguage
models. Preference-basedtraining,suchasReinforcementLearningfromHuman/AIFeedback(RLHF/RLAIF)
(Ouyangetal.,2022;Leeetal.,2023)andDirectPreferenceOptimization(DPO)(Rafailovetal.,2023),arewidely
usedtofine-tunemodelstoalignwithmorepracticalneeds. Ontheotherhand,thepreferencesofhumanandLLMs,
intheformofLLM-as-a-judgeorEloratings,havebecomethedefactojudgingcriteriaforassessingthequalityof
modeloutputs(Lietal.,2023b;Zhengetal.,2023)asthetasksarebecomingincreasinglydiverseandcomplex.
Unlikethewidelyappliedpreference-basedmethodsabove,thepreferencesthemselveslackthoroughresearch.
Inmostcases,theyareonlybinarylabelsindicatingwhichresponseispreferredasavagueformofexpression,
andweareunabletounderstandthepreferencesinanexplainableandquantitativeway. Asaresult,optimizing
modelstowardssuchgoalsinevitablyleadstocertainissues(Casperetal.,2023). Theseincludethetrainedmodels
engaginginover-optimization(Gaoetal.,2023)andrewardhacking(Sunetal.,2023),manifestinginundesired
wayssuchasproducingoverlyverboseanswers(Singhaletal.,2023)ordemonstratingsycophancy(Sharmaetal.,
2023),whichhinderthebuildingofmorereliableAIsystems.
Inthiswork,webuildasystematicframeworktodissecttheoverallpreferencesintoaquantitativecombination
ofmultipleclearlydefinedproperties. Topursueunderstandinginrealisticsettings,wesamplereal-worlduser
conversationswithabalanceddistributionofdifferentscenariosfromChatBotArenaConversations(Zhengetal.,
2023),whereeachsampleisapairofmodelresponsestoaquery. Weadoptanelaborateyetautomatedpipelineto
annotatethedatawithregardtoourpre-definedproperties(e.g.,harmlessoradmitlimits). Basedontheannotations,
wedeterminehowapairofresponsesdifferfromeachotheronallproperties. Thesedistinctionsarethenusedto
fitBayesianlogisticregressionmodels,whichhelpusquantitativelydecomposepreferencesbasedondifferent
propertiesbyexaminingtheirweights.
Leveragingtheaboveframework,weanalyzethehumanpreferencesofrealusersandthepreferencesofnumerous
LLMswecollect. Theanalysisisconductedseparatelyondifferentscenariostoavoidthemixingofpreferences
andachieveclearerconclusions(seeFigure1foranexample).
Wesummarizethekeyfindingsasfollows:
1. Humansarelesssensitivetoerrors,clearlydislikeamodelwhenitadmitsitslimits,andpreferaresponsethat
supportstheirstances(§4.1).
2. AdvancedLLMslikeGPT-4-Turboprefercorrectness,clarity,andharmlessnessmore(§4.1).
3. LLMs of similar sizes exhibit similar preferences irrespective of training methods, and the preference of a
pretrained-onlyLLMislargelyunchangedafteralignment(§4.2).
Finally,werevealthatbenchmarkswithLLM-as-a-judgeareeasytomanipulate(§4.3). Ourexperimentson
AlpacaEval2.0(Lietal.,2023b)andMT-Bench(Zhengetal.,2023)showthataligningmodelswiththejudges’
preferencesincreasesscores,whereasdivergefromthesepreferencesleadstolowerscores. Thisisachievableacross
bothtraining-freeandtraining-basedmethods,withscorevariationsupto0.59onMT-Bench(1-10scale)and31.94
onAlpacaEval2.0(0-100scale). Themanipulationhighlightstheurgentneedformorerobustbenchmarksand
furtherunderscorestheimportanceofunderstandingpreference.
2 RelatedWork
TheApplicationofPreferences Intraining,preferencedatathroughpairwisecomparisonsisusedtobuildthe
rewardmodelinReinforcementLearningfromHuman/AIFeedback(RLHF/RLAIF)(Ouyangetal.,2022;Baietal.,
2022;Leeetal.,2023;Anthropic,2023)orasthelearningtargetinDirectPreferenceOptimization(DPO)(Rafailov
etal.,2023;Tunstalletal.,2023;Ivisonetal.,2023). Inevaluation,comparingmodeloutputstoreferences(Li
etal.,2023b;Duboisetal.,2023;Zhouetal.,2023),directlyratingindividualresponses(Zhengetal.,2023)or
usingEloratingsfromhumanvotes(Zhengetal.,2023)havebecomecommonwaystoassessthealignedmodels.
ChallengesinPreference-basedMethods ThepreferencesofhumanandLLMsaregreatlyaffectedbyfeatures
like the length of a response (Singhal et al., 2023), sycophancy (Sharma et al., 2023), or certain writing styles
(Gudibandeetal.,2023)duetolimitedannotationtime(ChmielewskiandKucker,2020),cognitivebiasesofanno-
tators(Pandeyetal.,2022),limitedreasoningabilityandself-enhancementbias(Zhengetal.,2023). Consequently,
the reward model trained as the proxy of preferences is vulnerable to over-optimization (Gao et al., 2023) and
rewardhacking(Sunetal.,2023)inRLHF.Moreover,thiscanleadtoinstabilityinpreference-basedevaluation,
reducingthecredibilityandreliabilityoftheassessmentresults(Wangetal.,2023;Hoskingetal.,2023).
UnderstandingandDemonstratingPreferences Perezetal.(2022)generatemultiple-choiceevaluationswith
LMstodiscovermodelpreferencesacrossvariouspersonas. Turpinetal.(2023)andWeietal.(2023)findthat
modelsmayagreewithincorrectanswersiftheyaredeliberatelysuggestedinqueries. Similartoourwork,Sharma
etal.(2023)andHoskingetal.(2023)conductregression-basedanalysestodetectkeyfactorsinhumanpreferences,
2
suchassycophancy, assertiveness, andformatting. However, mostoftheseworksonlyofferbasicanalyseson
limited synthetic data. In contrast, we thoroughly analyze human and LLM preferences in various real-world
scenarioswithinaunifiedframework,andfurtherexplorepotentialapplicationsarisingfromadeeperunderstanding
ofpreferences.
3 PreferenceDissection
3.1 High-levelMethodology
Inthiswork,weanalyzepreferencesusingpairwise
comparison data, which has clearer and more con-
sistentresultsthanindividualratings(Ziegleretal.,
2019).Westartwitharawdataset𝐷,whereeachsam-
ple contains a pair of responses (𝑟 𝐴 ,𝑟 𝐵) to a query. A B
Then,wecollectthepreferencelabel𝑙 ∈ {𝐴,𝐵}from
a judge 𝑗 (human or an LLM)1 to indicate the pre- Pre-defined GPT-4-Turbo
Properties
ferredoneineachpair,formingthepreferencedataset
𝐷 𝑗. Asetofproperties 𝑃 = {𝑝
1
,...,𝑝 𝑁} isdefined Annotate
toguidetheanalysis. Ourobjectiveistodecompose A 3 0 2 0 … 0 1 3 3 Ratings:
How much
theoverallpreferencein𝐷 𝑗 intoquantifiablecontri- a Property
butions
(cid:201)
ofeachpropertyin𝑃: 𝐷 𝑗 ⇒ (cid:201) 𝑖 𝑁 =1 𝛼 𝑖 ⊙ 𝑝 𝑖. B 1 3 0 0 … 2 1 1 3 is Satisfied
Here, represents the composition concept, and Compare
Comparison Feature Preference Label
𝛼 𝑖 ⊙ 𝑝 𝑖 showsthecontributionofproperty 𝑝 𝑖 toover-
allpreferencewitheffectstrengthas𝛼 𝑖. +1 -1 +1 0 … -1 0 +1 0 A
Toelaborate,asshowninFigure2,wefirstannotate
howeachpropertyin𝑃issatisfiedinaresponseusing Bayesian Logistic Fitting Degree of Preference
Regression for Properties
aLikertscalerating,whichisappliedtoboth𝑟 𝐴and
𝑟 𝐵 inasample. Then,wecomparetheratingsoftwo
responsesacrosstheseproperties,resultinginasetof …
+1/0/-1outcomes,indicatingif𝑟 𝐴isbetter,equal,or p r o n p a e m r e ty s harmless … friendly … admit limits … lengthy
worsethan𝑟 𝐵 perproperty.2 Theseoutcomescreate
Figure2: Anoverviewofourhigh-levelmethodology.
the“comparisonfeature”ofasample. Next,welearn
Bayesianlogisticregressionmodelstopredictpreferencelabelsusingtheobtained“comparisonfeature”,andthe
fittedweightsofthemodelsrepresenttheeffectstrengthsforeachproperty.
3.2 Dataset
Topursueanalysisinrealisticsettings,wechooseChatbotArenaConversations(Zhengetal.,2023)astheraw
dataset𝐷. Itiscollectedfromapublicplatformwhereuserscanfreelyconversewithtwomodelssimultaneously
andselectapreferredone. Wefilteroutsampleswith“Tie/BothBad”labelsandmulti-turnconversationsforfuture
worktostreamlineannotationandanalysis.
Wenoticethatpreferencesofdifferentscenariosvaryalot,sowetakeascenario-balancedsampling. Wefirst
usetheOpenAImoderation3andtoxicitytagsinthedatasettoidentify400sampleswithunsafequeries. Wethen
utilizetheclassifierinLietal.(2023a)tocategorizetherestsamplesinto10scenarios: ExamQuestions,Code,
CreativeWriting,FunctionalWriting,Communication,Knowledge-aware,Advice,DailyTasks,NLPTasks,and
Others(seeTable7inAppendixBfordetaileddescriptions). SincetheKnowledge-AwareandOthersscenarios
haveanotablyhigherproportioninthedata,werandomlyselect820samplesforeach,whiletaking400onesfrom
theotherscenarios.
3.3 CollectingPreferences
Sincehumanpreferencesalreadyexistintherawdataset𝐷,wecandirectlygetthepreferencedataset𝐷 ℎ𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑛,and
onlyneedtocollectLLMpreferencesadditionally.Weselect2proprietaryLLMs:GPT-4-Turbo(gpt-4-1106-preview)
andGPT-3.5-Turbo(gpt-3.5-turbo-1106), and30open-sourceLLMs(seeTable8inAppendixC)tocollect
LLMpreferencedatasets32×𝐷 𝐿𝐿𝑀.
Tominimizepromptbiasinmodelpreferenceassessment,weuseastraightforwardone: “BetweenResponse
A and Response B, which better addresses the user’s query? The better response is Response”, and measure
1Wetreatpreferencesfromdifferenthumanannotatorscollectivelyas“human”andvieweachLLMasseparate.
2Directlyannotatingcomparisonoutcomesisfeasible,butearlyexperimentsindicateityieldsanexcessivenumberofslightly
differentproperties,whichhurtsanalysisreliability.
3https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/moderation
3
3.4 Pre-definedPropertiesandAnnoatation
Table1: The29pre-definedproperties,including21Basic,5Query-specific,and3ErrorDetectionones.
Group Properties
Query-specific clarifyintent,showempathetic,satisfyconstraints,supportstances,correctmistakes
harmless,grammarlycorrect,wellformatted,non-repetitive,funny,userhetoricaldevices,admit
Basic limits,clear,friendly,useinformalexpressions,containrichinfo,persuasive,polite,complexword
&sentence,step-by-step,novel,interactive,usesupportingmaterials,authoritative,relevant,lengthy
ErrorDetection nominorerrors,nomoderateerrors,nosevereerrors
preferencesbytheoutputlog-probabilityof“A”or“B”.AcknowledgingapositionalbiasinLLMs(Wangetal.,
2023),wheretheyprefereitherthefirstorsecondresponseirrespectiveofcontent,wealternateresponseorderand
averagelog-probabilitiesforanaccuratepreferencerating. Thismethodyieldsabinarylabelwiththesameformat
ashumanpreferences.
3.4 Pre-definedPropertiesandAnnoatation
Wedesign29propertiesforouranalysis,referringtocriteriafromLietal.(2023a);Sharmaetal.(2023);Hosking
etal.(2023). Theseproperties,categorizedintoBasic,Query-Specific,andErrorDetectiongroups,arelistedin
Table1. Forautomatedannotation,weemployGPT-4-Turbotoannotateapairofresponsessimultaneouslyinone
prompttokeepaconsistentstandard. WeprovideafullyannotatedsampleinTable10inAppendixD.
BasicProperties Wedefine21basicproperties,includingstylisticoneslikefunny,andcontent-basedoneslike
admitlimits. GPT-4-Turboisrequiredtorateresponsesfrom0to3foreachpropertyinasingleprompt. Wefind
thatincludingthequeryinthepromptdisturbstheannotationasmostofthebasicpropertiesarequery-independent.
Thus,weonlyusethequeryforrelevantandnovel,thetwoquery-awareones. Forlengthy,wedirectlymeasure
wordcountusingNLTK(LoperandBird,2002). DetailedannotationpromptsanddescriptionsareinFigure6,7
and8inAppendixA.
Query-specificProperties Wedefined5query-specific
propertiesthatareannotatedbasedontheuserquery,e.g., Table2:Numberofsamplesmeeting5Query-specific
supportstancesisinapplicableforquerieswithnosubjec- prerequisites.
tive stance. Therefore to improve accuracy, we adopt a
two-roundannotationprocess. Thefirstrounddetermines
Prerequisite # Prerequisite #
ifaquerymeetstheprerequisitesfortheseproperties,and
withexplicitconstraints 1,418 unclearintent 459
welistthenumberofsamplessatisfyingtheprerequisites
showsubjectivestances 388 expressfeelings 121
inTable2. Inthesecondround,annotationfocusesonly containmistakesorbias 401
on applicable properties. The detailed prompts and the
specificannotationgoalforeachpropertyareillustratedinFigure9,10,11and12inAppendixA.Theannotation
resultsarealsoconvertedintoaratingfrom0to3(seeAppendixF).
ErrorDetection AlthoughGPT-4-Turbotypicallyidentifieserrorsinmostsamplesaccurately,itmayfailwith
contentbeyonditstrainingdata. Therefore, wefirstaskittoevaluatewhetheritcanreliablydetecterrorsina
response, outputtingan“applicable/notapplicable”tag. Samplestaggedas“notapplicable”areexcluded. For
clearerannotation,welimiterrortypestofour: FactualError,InformationContradiction,MathOperationError,
andCodeGenerationError. Wealsodefinethreeseveritylevelsforerrors: Minor,Moderate,andSevere,basedon
theirimpactonresponsecorrectness. Additionally,areferenceanswergeneratedindependentlybyGPT-4-Turbois
includedintheprompt,whichhasproventohelpidentifyerrorscorrectly(Zhengetal.,2023;Saundersetal.,2022;
Sunetal.,2024). WeaskGPT-4-Turbotolisterrorsbytypeandseverity,creating3propertiesbasedontheerror
countperseveritylevel. ThecompletepromptisshowninFigure13inAppendixA.
AnnotationQualityCheck Weaskfourofourauthorstochecktheannotationquality. Theyarerequiredto
determineiftheyagreewiththeannotations,usingthesameguidelinesforGPT-4-Turbo. Theagreementratesare
93.1%forBasicpropertyratings,85.1%forDetectedErrors,with90%ofresponseshavingallerrorsidentified
withoutmissing. ForQuery-specificproperties,theagreementis94.8%inthefirst-roundprerequisitequestionsand
85.5%inthesecond-roundannotation. MoredetailscanbefoundinTable11inAppendixG.
3.5 CalculatingEffectStrengthsofProperties
BuildingComparisonFeatures Foreachsample,weassign+1/-1/0toeachpropertybasedonwhethertherating
of𝑟 𝐴ishigher/lowerorequaltothatof𝑟 𝐵. ForErrorDetectionproperties,alowercountoferrorsin𝑟 𝐴yields+1.
ThedetailedcomparisonstrategyisinAppendixH.Theseoutcomesformacomparisonfeature,𝜙 ∈ {+1,0,−1}𝑁 ,
where𝑁 =29isthetotalnumberofproperties.
4


=== Explaining Length Bias in LLM-Based Preference Evaluations.pdf ===
Explaining Length Bias in LLM-Based Preference Evaluations
ZhengyuHu1, LinxinSong3, JieyuZhang4, ZheyuanXiao1,7, TianfuWang1,
ZhenyuChen5, JianxunLian6, NicholasJingYuan6, KaizeDing8, HuiXiong1,2
1 ThrustofArtificialIntelligence,HKUST(Guangzhou),China
2 DepartmentofComputerScienceandEngineering,HKUST,HongKongSAR,China
3 UniversityofSouthernCalifornia 4 UniversityofWashington 5 MeiTuan
6 Microsoft 7 Resideo 8 NorthwesternUniversity
Abstract are not without their shortcomings, particularly
concerning the introduction and perpetuation of
Theuseoflargelanguagemodels(LLMs)as
biases(Wangetal.,2023a;Maetal.,2025;Wang
judges,particularlyinpreferencecomparisons
etal.,2025;Songetal.,2025c). Oneoftheimpor-
hasbecomewidespread,butthisrevealsano-
tantbiasesobservedinLLM-basedevaluationsis
tablebiastowardslongerresponses,undermin-
ingthereliabilityofsuchevaluations. Tobetter thepreferenceforlongertextualresponses. Previ-
understandsuchbias,weproposetodecompose ousempiricalstudieshaveexploredastrongcorre-
the preference evaluation metric, specifically lationbetweenthelengthofresponseanditsper-
thewinrate,intotwokeycomponents: desir- ceivedqualityrepresentedbywinrate(Zhaoetal.,
ability and information mass, where the for-
2024;Duboisetal.,2024a;Parketal.,2024). How-
merislength-independentandrelatedtotrust-
ever, it is not reasonable to simply attribute the
worthiness such as correctness, toxicity, and
preferencetolengthsincelengthisonlythesurface
consistency,andthelatterislength-dependent
and represents the amount of information in factorforthequalityofasentence. Therefore,in
theresponse. Weempiricallydemonstratedthe this work, we investigate the following question:
decompositionthroughcontrolledexperiments whatarethemajorfactorscontributingtothewin
and found that response length impacts eval- rate?
uations by influencing information mass. To
Tosolvethisproblem,weproposeanewframe-
deriveareliableevaluationmetricthatassesses
work that decomposes the quality of a response,
contentqualitywithoutbeingconfoundedby
as measured by its win rate in pairwise compar-
response length, we propose AdapAlpaca, a
isons,intotwodistinctcomponents: (1)desirabil-
simpleyeteffectiveadjustmenttowinratemea-
surement. Specifically,AdapAlpacaensuresa ity,whichisindependentoflengthandreflectsthe
fair comparison of response quality by align- trustworthinessoftheresponse,encompassingfac-
ingthelengthsofreferenceandtestmodelre- torssuchascorrectness,toxicity,andconsistency;
sponsesunderequivalentlengthintervals. and(2)informationmass,whichisdependenton
length and represents the amount of information
1 Introduction
in the response, measurable through conditional
As LLMs are increasingly deployed across vari- entropy. Wevalidateourhypothesisbytestingwin
ousdomainsofartificialintelligence,fromnatural ratesintwodifferentscenarios: (i)comparingnor-
languageprocessingtocomplexdecision-making mal responses with those differing in desirability
systems (Song et al., 2024b, 2025a; Zhang et al., (e.g.,LogicaltobedesiredandBiasednotdesired),
2024b; Hu et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025a), ensur- and(ii)comparingnormalresponseswithconcise
ingtheirperformance,reliability,andfairnesshas anddetailedresponses,whichvaryininformation
becomeacriticalchallenge(Huetal.,2024a;Liu mass. Ourexperimentsdemonstratethatresponses
etal.,2025b;Wangetal.,2023b;Songetal.,2023; withnegativedesirabilitysignificantlydecreasethe
Wang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025; Song et al., winrate,whereasinformationmass,whennotneg-
2025b). LLM-basedauto-evaluatorshaveemerged ativelyinfluencedbydesirability,ispositivelycor-
as a crucial tool in this context, offering a cost- related with the win rate, thus confirming the ef-
effectiveandscalablealternativetolabor-intensive fectiveness of our metric. Following this finding,
humanevaluations(Lietal.,2024a,b;Duboisetal., wedesignanewpromptcalled"QualityEnhance-
2024b;Songetal.,2024a;Zhanetal.,2025). De- ment"toimproveinformationmasswithpositive
spite their advantages, these automated systems desirability. ThispromptenablesGPT-4toachieve
1
5202
peS
4
]GL.sc[
5v58010.7042:viXra
Length Biased Evaluation(AlpacEval) emphasizingdesirabilityandinformationmass,
offeringamorepreciseLLMperformancemea-
Compare sure. Based on this interpretation, we develop
the"QualityEnhancement"prompt,whichim-
Reply (Diverse Length) Fixed Ref.
proveswinratesbyboostinginformationmass
withpositivedesirability. Thispromptimproves
win rates across multiple LLMs, with average
AlpacaEval Questions increases of 23.44% for GPT-3.5, 16.48% for
LMs
Length Debiased Evaluation(Ours) GPT-4,22.28%forLLAMA3-70b,and20.40%
forQwen1.572B.
Compare
512 words Reply
500 words Ref. • To mitigate length bias, we introduce AdapAl-
paca,amethodthatalignstheresponselengths
Compare
200 words Reply ofthereferenceandtestmodel,enablingafair
200 words Ref.
comparisonofdesirabilityandinformationmass
Reply (Diverse Length)
underthesamelengthintervals.
Figure 1: Comparison between AlpacaEval and Ada-
pAlpaca(Ours). InAlpacaEval,thereferenceanswer • Using both AlpacaEval and AdapAlpaca, we
hasafixedlength, regardlessofthelengthofthetest analyzetheimpactoflengthbiasinDPO.Our
model’sanswer. Incontrast,AdapAlpacadynamically experimentswithTÜLU2andTÜLU2-dpomod-
selectsareferenceanswerthatmatchesthelengthofthe
elsat7B,13B,and70BscalesshowthatDPO
testmodel’sanswer.
leadstohigherhumanpreference,butthisgainis
amplifiedbyresponselength,withAlpacaEval
state-of-the-artresultsonAlpacaEval, increasing showinghigherwinratesgainthanAdapAlpaca.
thewinratefrom50.00%to70.16%.
2 RelatedWork
Throughourdecompositionofthequalityofa
response,weobservethatresponselengthimpacts
Reference-free Evaluation Metrics. Reference-
evaluations primarily by influencing information
freeevaluationmetricshavealonghistory(Louis
mass. However,areliableevaluationmetricshould
andNenkova,2013),whichevaluatesthegenerated
assess content quality without being confounded
text based on intrinsic properties and coherence
byextraneousfactorssuchasresponselength(Koo
withthecontext. Althoughtheyachievehighaccu-
etal.,2023;Yeetal.,2024;Duboisetal.,2024a),
racyonmatchinginner-annotator,theachievement
wefurtherproposeAdapAlpaca,abenchmarkde-
suffersfromspuriouscorrelationssuchasperplex-
signedtoimproveevaluationfairness. Byensuring
ityandlength(Durmusetal.,2022). Recently,peo-
thatresponsesarecomparedatthesamelengthin-
plehavestartedusingastrongmodel(e.g.,GPT-4)
tervals, AdapAlpaca effectively mitigates length
as an evaluator to perform a zero-shot reference-
bias,enablingaccuratecontentqualityassessments
free evaluation on the weak models (Shen et al.,
(seeFigure1). WithAdapAlpaca,wefurtherana-
2023;Duboisetal.,2024b;Chenetal.,2023;Park
lyzelengthbiasinDirectPreferenceOptimization
etal.,2024). However,leveragingastrongmodel’s
(DPO)(Rafailovetal.,2023)toexaminethefind-
intrinsicknowledgetoperformreference-freeeval-
ings in prior work (Gu et al., 2024; Ivison et al.,
uationignoresthepromptpreferenceofthestrong
2023;Liuetal.,2024)thatDPOlengthensmodel
model,forexample,theprompt’slength.
responses. Specifically, we test TÜLU2 (Ivison
etal.,2023)andTÜLU2-dpomodelsat7B,13B, CorrelationBetweenLengthandWinRate. Pre-
and 70B scales on AlpacaEval and AdapAlpaca. vious research reveals that sentence length will
Our results indicate that DPO leads to higher hu- influencetheevaluationoftrustworthiness. Specif-
man preference, but this gain is amplified by re- ically, when using a GPT-4 to represent human
sponse length, with AlpacaEval showing higher preference, it will prefer to choose a long sen-
winratesgainthanAdapAlpaca. Ourmajorfind- tence rather than a short sentence (Dubois et al.,
ingsandcontributionsareasfollows: 2024a;Ivisonetal.,2023;Guetal.,2024;Huetal.,
2024b; Koo et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Wu
• We propose a novel interpretation of win rate, and Aji, 2023; Dubois et al., 2024b; Chen et al.,
2
2023;Huetal.,2024c). Suchpreferencewillintro- conditionalentropyusingthemethoddescribedin
duce a length-correlated bias and help the model (VonNeumann,1932). Furtherdetailsareprovided
with long-generation sentences gain a high score inAppendixA.6.
on human preference evaluation. Although these
Winrate. Assumewehaveasetofinstructionsx.
approachesshowahighcorrelationtohumanpref-
Wepromptatestmodelmtogeneratearesponse
erence,debiasingsuchasautomatedevaluationis
z for each instruction. Similarly, we prompt a
m
highlyvaluable. (Duboisetal.,2024a)proposesa
reference model b (referred to as the "baseline"
length-controlled (LC) win rate by removing the
inAlpacaEval)togeneratearesponsez foreach
b
length-correlated term in the win rate regression
instruction.2 An annotator then evaluates these
model. The new LC win rate shows an even per-
responsesbasedontheirqualityandassignsapref-
formancebetweenconciseandverboseinputand
erence y ∈ {m,b}, indicating which model’s re-
a higher correlation when compared with human
sponseissuperior. Toproperlyunderstandthecon-
preference.
cept of win rate, we first need to define what we
meanbyresponsequality:
3 UnderstandingtheMajorFactorsofWin
Rate Definition1 (Response Quality), denoted as
Q (z|x),quantifiestheeffectivenessofthemodel’s
Tointerpretthecorrelationbetweenlengthandwin e
response z in addressing the given instruction x,
rate,weproposeanewframeworkbasedonquality,
asevaluatedbyanannotatore. Annotatorprefer
which includes desirability (length-independent,
responseswithhigherquality.
related to trustworthiness) and information mass
(length-dependent,representedbyconditionalen- Byleveragingthedefinitionofquality,wecannow
tropy). We validate our hypothesis through two formulate the win rate as the comparison of sen-
scenarios: (1)testingtheimpactofdifferentdesir- tencequalityasfollows:
abilityonwinratewiththesameinformationmass,
and(2)testingtheinfluenceofdifferentinforma- WinRate(m,b) = E (cid:2)1 (cid:3) , (1)
x Qe(zm|x)>Qe(z
b
|x)
tionmassonwinratewiththesamedesirability.
where 1 is an indicator function and
3.1 Preliminary 1 represents the preference
Qe(zm|x)>Qe(z
b
|x)
Evaluation protocol. We utilize the AlpacaEval distribution for each individual. Previous
dataset (Li et al., 2023b) to assess human prefer- works (Chen et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b;
ences. AlpacaEval is a reference-free evaluation Duboisetal.,2024a,b)utilizeLLMsaszero-shot
datasetforLLMs,encompassing805instructions evaluatorsduetotheirexceptionalperformanceon
thatreflecthumaninteractionsontheAlpacaweb real-worldtasks. Ourexperimentalsetupadheres
demo. To ensure a comprehensive evaluation of to the AlpacaEval Leaderboard (Li et al., 2023b)
human preferences, we extend our testing to ad- guidelines,employingtheGPT-4Preview(11/06)3
ditional datasets, including LIMA (Zhou et al., asboththeBaselinebandtheAnnotatore.
2023), Vicuna (Chiang et al., 2023), Koala (Vu
3.2 QualityDecomposition
etal.,2023),Wizardlm(Xuetal.,2023),andSelf-
Instruct(Wangetal.,2022),inlinewithprevious Beforediscussingthecompositionofquality, we
studies(Chenetal.,2023;Zhangetal.,2024a;Du firstdefinetwokeyconcepts: desirabilityandin-
etal.,2023;Zhaoetal.,2024;Lietal.,2023a). formationmass. Desirabilityreflectstheinherent
BaseModels. Inourexperiments, wefollowthe qualityattributesofaresponsethatmakeitreliable
setupintheAlpacaEvalLeaderboard1,usingthe andvaluable,irrespectiveofitslength,whileinfor-
GPT-4 Preview (11/06) as Baseline and the An- mationmasscapturesthequantityofinformation
notator. The references to GPT-3.5, LLAMA3- in the response, with longer responses generally
70b,andQwen1.572binthemaintextdenotegpt- containingmorecontent. Thedefinitionsofdesir-
3.5-turbo-0125, meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-70B- abilityandinformationmassareasfollows:
Instruct (AI@Meta, 2024), and Qwen/Qwen1.5-
2Inthiscontext,mstandsfor"model"andbdenotes"base-
72B-Chat(Baietal.,2023),respectively. Follow-
line", which in this paper follows the AlpacaEval Leader-
ingpreviouswork(Weietal.,2024),wecalculate board’suseofGPT-4Preview(11/06).
3Inthispaper,unlessspecifiedotherwise,GPT-4refersto
1https://tatsu-lab.github.io/alpaca_eval GPT-4Preview(11/06).
3
Win Rate Lose Rate Entropy Win Rate Lose Rate Entropy Win Rate Lose Rate Entropy
Origin 50.0 50.0 0.57 Origin 50.0 50.0 0.58 Origin 50.0 50.0 0.58
Copy-paste 13.0 87.0 0.57 Copy-paste 12.3 87.7 0.57 Copy-paste 17.8 82.2 0.58
Biased 7.8 92.2 0.58 Biased 11.3 88.7 0.58 Biased 15.6 84.4 0.58
Inconsistent 10.6 89.4 0.56 Inconsistent 13.3 86.7 0.58 Inconsistent 11.7 88.3 0.58
Illogical 3.0 97.0 0.57 Illogical 4.3 95.7 0.58 Illogical 6.1 93.9 0.58
Verbose 9.3 90.7 0.58 Verbose 11.7 88.3 0.58 Verbose 13.9 86.1 0.58
Toxic 4.2 95.8 0.57 Toxic 1.7 98.3 0.58 Toxic 10.6 89.4 0.59
Relevance 54.0 46.0 0.57 Relevance 51.3 48.7 0.57 Relevance 56.7 43.3 0.58
Logical 57.1 42.9 0.57 Logical 54.3 45.7 0.58 Logical 53.9 46.1 0.58
(a) AlpacaEval (b) LIMA (c) Koala
Win Rate Lose Rate Entropy Win Rate Lose Rate Entropy Win Rate Lose Rate Entropy
Origin 50.0 50.0 0.53 Origin 50.0 50.0 0.60 Origin 50.0 50.0 0.58
Copy-paste 7.5 92.5 0.53 Copy-paste 16.2 83.8 0.59 Copy-paste 18.3 81.7 0.57
Biased 13.9 86.1 0.54 Biased 8.8 91.2 0.60 Biased 7.3 92.7 0.58
Inconsistent 13.5 86.5 0.53 Inconsistent 7.5 92.5 0.60 Inconsistent 9.6 90.4 0.58
Illogical 5.2 94.8 0.54 Illogical 3.8 96.2 0.60 Illogical 2.3 97.7 0.58
Verbose 14.7 85.3 0.54 Verbose 13.8 86.2 0.60 Verbose 9.2 90.8 0.58
Toxic 7.9 92.1 0.54 Toxic 1.2 98.8 0.60 Toxic 6.0 94.0 0.58
Relevance 52.4 47.6 0.54 Relevance 52.5 47.5 0.60 Relevance 52.8 47.2 0.57
Logical 54.8 45.2 0.54 Logical 55.0 45.0 0.59 Logical 56.4 43.6 0.58
(d) Self-Instruct (e) Vicuna (f) Wizardlm
Figure2:Validationofdesirability’simpactonqualityforGPT-4.Theresultsdemonstratethatdesirabilityinfluences
thewinrate.
Definition2 (Desirability), denoted as D (z|x), 3.3 DesirabilityInfluencesQuality
e
measurestheprobabilitythatannotatorewillac-
To evaluate the impact of desirability on quality,
cepttheresponsez givenaninstructionx. Itcan
we design experiments using eight strategies to
be influenced by factors such as consistency and
manipulateresponsedesirability. Thesestrategies
toxicityandisindependentofresponselength.
include: (1) Origin: No prompt restrictions. (2)
Definition3 (Information mass), denoted as
Copy-paste: CopyGPT-4’sresponsethreetimes.
H (z|x), measures the amount of information in
e (3)Biased: Providebiasedresponses,favoringcer-
aresponsez givenaninstructionx,asevaluated
tain ideas without justification. (4) Inconsistent:
by annotator e. It is represented by conditional
Providecontradictoryinformationtocreateconfu-
entropyandisdirectlywithresponselength.
sion. Illogical: Give responses based on flawed
DetailsonthedesignrationaleareprovidedinAp- logicorirrelevantinformation. (5)Verbose: Pro-
pendixF.Withthesedefinitionsinplace,wenow videlengthyresponsesfilledwithbroad,unrelated
present our main hypothesis on answer quality, details. (6)Toxic: Useoffensivelanguagewithan
startingwithanassumption: aggressivetone. (7)Relevant: Provideresponses
Assumption1 (Quality Decomposition). For a that align with the query. (8) Logical: Base re-
given answer z and instruction x, the quality sponsesonsoundreasoningandvalidarguments.
Q (z|x)recognizedbyannotatorecanbeviewed
e The results are shown in Figure 2. To eliminate
asafunctionoftwokeycomponents:
the impact of information mass on win rate, we
Q (z|x)←{D (z|x),H (z|x)}, (2) use conditional entropy to represent information
e e e
mass and ensure the information mass of Origin
where D (z|x) denotes the desirability of the re-
e and the other prompts remains as consistent as
sponse, and H (z|x) represents the information
e possible. The entropy values shown in the Fig-
mass.
ure2representtheaverageconditionalentropyof
To systematically verify our hypothesis, we con- the responses for each prompt. Details for these
duct two experiments targeting the manipulation prompts and relevant implementation are shown
ofthesekeycomponentsinGPT-4’sresponsesin inAppendixM,AppendixA.2andAppendixA.3.
Section 3.3 and Section 3.4. Additional results First, we observe that although the Copy-paste
withmoretestandannotatormodelsareprovided andOriginpromptsmaintainidenticalinformation
inAppendixNandAppendixO. mass(assimplyreplicatingtextdoesnotincrease
4


=== Exploring Length Generalization in Large Language Models.pdf ===
Exploring Length Generalization in Large Language Models
CemAnil∗1,3, YuhuaiWu2,AndersAndreassen1,AitorLewkowycz1
VedantMisra1,VinayRamasesh1,AmbroseSlone1,GuyGur-Ari1,
EthanDyer1,BehnamNeyshabur1
1GoogleResearch,BlueshiftTeam
2GoogleResearch
3UniversityofToronto,VectorInstitute
Abstract
Theabilitytoextrapolatefromshortprobleminstancestolongeronesisanim-
portantformofout-of-distributiongeneralizationinreasoningtasks,andiscrucial
when learning from datasets where longer problem instances are rare. These
includetheoremproving,solvingquantitativemathematicsproblems,andreading/-
summarizingnovels. Inthispaper,weruncarefulempiricalstudiesexploringthe
lengthgeneralizationcapabilitiesoftransformer-basedlanguagemodels. Wefirst
establishthatnaivelyfinetuningtransformersonlengthgeneralizationtasksshows
significantgeneralizationdeficienciesindependentofmodelscale. Wethenshow
thatcombiningpretrainedlargelanguagemodels’in-contextlearningabilitieswith
scratchpadprompting(askingthemodeltooutputsolutionstepsbeforeproducing
ananswer)resultsinadramaticimprovementinlengthgeneralization. Werun
carefulfailureanalysesoneachofthelearningmodalitiesandidentifycommon
sourcesofmistakesthathighlightopportunitiesinequippinglanguagemodelswith
theabilitytogeneralizetolongerproblems.
1 Introduction
Manynaturalproblems,suchastheoremprovingandprogramsynthesis,haveanotionoflengththat
stronglycorrelateswiththedifficultyofthetask. However,inthesedomains,thenumberofavailable
problemstypicallydropsrapidlyasafunctionofproblemlength(e.g. Figure2). Hence,itisdesirable
tolearnfromexamplesofshorterlengthstogeneralizetolongeronesoratleastreducethenumber
ofsamplesrequiredforlongerexamples. Werefertothistypeofproblemaslengthgeneralization.
Recent work on large language models (LLMs) has shown consistent improvement in their per-
formance by scaling model and dataset size. However, such models are still incapable of length
generalization. Forexample,[1]showsthateventhoughscalehelpswithsolvingarithmeticproblems,
scalealoneislikelyinsufficientforlearningtosolveinstancesofarbitrarylengths. Thisimpliesthat
modelsfailtolearnthegeneralalgorithmsthatwouldenablethiskindofgeneralization. Indeed,
Razeghietal.[2]showedthattheperformanceofLLMsonmathematicalcalculationscorrelates
withtermfrequencyinthetrainingdata. ThissuggeststhatLLMsmighthavegainedtheircurrent
performancefromsurface-levelmemorizationinsteadoflearningtoapplythecorrectalgorithm.
Arecentlineofworkproposestouseascratchpad,orchain-of-thoughtreasoning,whenprompting
LLMs[3,4,5]onmulti-steptasks. Breakingdowntasksintomultiplesmallstepsandpresenting
thesestepstothemodelleadstoimprovedperformanceacrossavarietyofreasoningtasksincluding
wordproblems,arithmetic,andcodeexecution.
Weperformasystematicstudyoflengthgeneralizationwithtransformer-basedlargelanguagemodels.
Weconsiderproblemsinwhichlearninganalgorithmcaninprincipleenableamodeltoextrapolate
∗Work done while interning at Google Research, Blueshift Team. Correspondence to:
anilcem@cs.toronto.edu, yuhuai@google.com, neyshabur@google.com.
36thConferenceonNeuralInformationProcessingSystems(NeurIPS2022).
2202
voN
41
]LC.sc[
2v10940.7022:viXra
Figure1: Examplesofvariableassignmentproblems: Cantransformerlanguagemodelslearnfromshort
instances of the Variable Assignment task (left) to extrapolate to much longer instances (right)? Length
generalizationistheabilitytolearnfromshorter/easierinstancesofaproblemtohandlelonger/harderinstances.
Techniques In-distribution Out-of-distribution Improveswithscale
Fine-tune (cid:51)(cid:51) (cid:55) (cid:55)
Prompting (cid:55) (cid:55) (cid:55)
Fine-tune+Prompting (cid:51)(cid:51) (cid:55) (cid:55)
Fine-tune+Scratchpad (cid:51)(cid:51) (cid:55) (cid:55)
Prompting+Scratchpad (cid:51) (cid:51) (cid:51)
Fine-tune+Prompting+Scratchpad (cid:51)(cid:51) (cid:51)(cid:51)∗ (cid:51)(cid:51)
Table 1: Performance on length generalization tasks of three techniques that language models admit: (1)
Finetuning,(2)Prompting(orin-contextfew-shotlearning)and(3)Scratchpad(Chain-of-Thoughtreasoning).
Wefindthateachtechnique(andthecombinationsthereof)havedifferentmodesoffailureandpresentdifferent
trade-offsregardinginandout-of-distributioncoverage. (cid:55)signifiespoor(cid:51)signifiesnontrivial,(cid:51)(cid:51)signifies
near-perfectperformance.(*)Referstotask-dependency.
fromshortexamplestoproblemsofarbitrarylength.Inparticular,wefocusontwosimplealgorithmic
tasks,parityandvariableassignment,inwhichthemodelneedstokeeptrackofastateinorderto
extrapolatetolongerlengths(seeFigure1). Theseproblemsareilluminatingbecausetheirsimplicity
allowsustoprobethefailuremodesaswellascontrastthelearnedsolutionswiththegroundtruth
algorithm. Theyprovideuswithasettingtostudyhow/whentheselargelanguagemodelsstarttofail.
WestudycombinationsofthreekindsoftechniquesforLLMs: finetuning,fewshotprompting(also
referredtoasin-contextlearning), anduseofascratchpad(alsoreferredtoaschain-of-thought),
tounderstandtheroleofeachmethodandtheinterplayamongthethreeinlengthgeneralization.
Interestingly,weobservenon-trivialinteractionsamongthethreetechniques;seeTable1.
ContributionsOurmaincontributionsareasfollows:
• We define and characterize the problem of length generalization using notions such as state
tracking,executiondepth,andper-steperrorrate. Westudyandcarefullydesigntwotasks,parity
andvariableassignment,thatmeasurelengthgeneralization(Section2).
• Wefindthatinthefinetuningregime,scalingdata,modelsizes,andcomputedoesnotimprove
lengthgeneralization(Section3.1). Wealsoobservethatevenwhenthemodelattainsperfect
in-distributionaccuracy,itperformspoorlyinout-of-distributiondomains. Surprisingly,different
hyperparameterchoicesforfinetuninghavealargeeffectonlengthgeneralizationperformance,
whilehavingminimaleffectonthefinalin-distributionperformance(Section3.3).
• Weestablishfinetuningwithscratchpadalsofailstogeneralizetolongerproblems,incontrastto
whatissuggestedbypreviousworks[3]. Welookintothreepotentialfailurecases: positional
encoding,thepresenceofdistractors,andendoftokenprediction,andconcludethatdistractors
arethemainculpritoffailuresforlengthgeneralization(Section4).
• Weshowthatinthein-contextlearningregime,useofascratchpadshowsaqualitativelydifferent
behaviorandsignificantlyalleviatesthedecayofperformanceonlongerproblems. Thiscapability
issignificant,asitimpliesthatforLLMs,therearecertainskills,likelengthgeneralization,that
canbelearnedthroughin-contextlearningratherthanthroughfinetuningeveninthepresenceof
infinitedata. Thisisinstarkcontrasttothecommonnormsofmachinelearning(Section5).
2
Figure2: Realworlddatasetshaveheavytailsinlength: (left)Histogramoflengthsforproofspresentedin
theArchiveofFormalProofs(right)HistogramofthenumberoftokensforsolutionsintheMATHdataset.[6]
2 LengthGeneralization
Manysequencetasks—especiallyonesthatrequirereasoningcapabilities—haveprobleminstances
thatdifferintermsoftheirlengths. Shorterinstancesareofteneasiertostate,process,andhandle,
andrequirelesscomputetofindtheanswer. Bycontrast,longerinstancesaremorechallengingto
parse and require more compute to solve. Tasks that have a reasoning component are especially
well represented in this category — multi-hop reasoning [7], program execution [8], deductive
reasoning [9] and theorem proving [10], to name a few. Note that having to deal with differing
problemlengthsposestwosignificantchallenges. First,itisoftenthecasethatoneencounterslonger
problem instances than the ones ever encountered during training, and is required to extrapolate.
Second,eventhoughlongerprobleminstanceshavemuchmorevariety,real-worlddatasetsoften
containfewlonginstances(seeFigure2). Bothofthesechallengesareexacerbatediflearningagents
arenotabletogeneralizeacrossandbeyondthelengthstheylearnfromduringtraining. Thispaper
isaboutinvestigatingtowhatextenttransformerbasedlanguagemodelsareabletoobserveshort
probleminstancesandextrapolatetolongerones.
InstanceLengthasNumberofStepsinaMarkovProcessItispossibletodefineproblemlength
inmanydifferentwaystocapturedifferentaspectsofproblemdifficulty. Doesthereexistanotion
oflengththatwouldexposethesamelength-generalization-relatedproblemstructureobservedin
qualitativelyverydifferentsettings? Suchaframingwouldenableresearcherstodesignalgorithms
andinterventionsthathavethepotentialtogeneralizeacrossabroadrangeoftasks. Tothisend,we
taketheapproachofcharacterizinglengthinthecontextofadeterministicMarkovprocess. From
thisperspective,lengthissimplythenumberofstatetransitionsexperiencedbyaninitialworldstate.
In other words, the data-generation process can be described as sampling an (1) initial state and
a(2)variablenumberofstatetransformationstobeappliedsequentiallyontheinitialstate. The
agentisprovidedboththeinitialstateandthetransformations,andisaskedtopredictthefinalstate.
Thisframingappliestoawiderangeofsequenceproblems,ifnotallofthem—rangingfrommore
mechanicaltaskssuchascodeandalgorithmexecutionandtheoremproving,tolessstructuredtasks,
suchassolvingmathproblemsandsummarizingnovels.
Inourempiricalinvestigationwefocusontwosynthetictasks: parityandvariableassignment. These
tasksavoidproblem-specificsubtletiesthatcouldmisleadouranalyses,whilestronglycapturingthe
deterministicMarkovprocessstructure.
2.1 Tasks
Parity: The parity task is an age-old learning problem that requires the trained agent to predict
whetherabit-stringhasanevenoroddnumberofonesinit. Forexample,theparityofthebitstring
[0,1,1,0,1]is“odd"(or1)asopposedto“even"(or0), becausethereisanoddnumberof1sin
thebit-string. Theparitytaskadmitsasequentialsolutionthatenableslengthgeneralizationina
straightforwardway: simplyprocessthebitsleft-to-rightandrecordtheparityofthebitsprocessed
sofarasthestate. Thedefaultnotionoflengthintheparitytaskisthenumberofbitsintheinput.
However, we also experiment with a version where the number of bits is kept constant, and the
numberof1s(i.e. theparityflippingbit)issystematicallyvaried. Thenumberof1sstandsforthe
numberofstatechangescontainedintheinputbit-string,andactuallyappearstocaptureamore
relevantnotionoflengthfortransformermodels(seeSection3.1).
3
100
90
80
70
60
50
10 20 30 40
lengths
ycarucca
Parity - Vanilla Finetuning
model: 244m 100
model: 422m 95
model: 1b
90
model: 64b
training 85
80
75
70
65
60
5 10 15
lengths
ycarucca
Variable Assignment - Vanilla Finetuning
model: 244m
model: 422m
model: 1b
model: 64b
training
Figure 3: FinetunedLengthGeneralizationperformancedoesn’timprovewithscale: Modelsofvastly
differentscalesfailatlengthgeneralizationonbothParityandVariableAssignmenttasks,displayingidentical
generalizationpathologies.Thex-axisrepresentsproblemlengthandthey-axisrepresentstheaccuracyattained
atthatproblemlength.Thetraininglengthsarehighlightedingrey.
BooleanVariableAssignmentTask: TheBooleanVariableAssignmenttaskisdesignedtocapture
arbitrarilylong,potentiallybranchingunidirectionalexecutionflows. Aninstanceofthistaskcanbe
seeninFigure1. Theinputsconsistofsemanticallycorrect(i.e. bug-free)Pythonprogramsinwhich
eachlinecontainsabooleanvariableassignmentoperation. Theoutputissimplythevalueofthe
variablepresentedinthefinallineoftheprogram. Thesequentialsolutiontothistaskistosimply
executetheprogramlinebylinewhilekeepingtrackofthestateofallvariables.
ThedatagenerationprocedureinvolvesrandomlygeneratingexecutionflowsthatinvolveBoolean
operations;seeSupplementaryMaterial(SM)fordetails.
Wefocusourevaluationsontwovariantsofthisdataset. (1)Thediversevariableassignmentsplit
consistsofawiderangeofbooleanoperatorsavailableandisintendedtocontainmaximallydiverse
programs. (2)Thechain-likevariableassignmentsplitconsistsonlyofoperationsthatcomposethe
valuesofalreadydefinedvariables. Thisresultsinlongchainsofdependenciesbetweentheinitial
valuesofthevariablesandthequeriedone,ensuringthattherearealmostnoredundantoperationsin
theprogram(i.e. operationsthatcanberemovedwithoutaffectingtheoutputoftheprogram). This
splitemphasizesthesequentialnatureofthevariableassignmentproblem.
3 StandardFinetuningFailsatLengthGeneralization
Webeginbydemonstratingthatfinetuningtransformermodelsonlength-generalizationtasksresults
inpoorout-of-distributionperformance. InexperimentsweuseLaMDA2decoder-onlymodels. These
checkpointsweretrainedusinggeneralnaturallanguagedata. WeusetheAdaFactoroptimizer[11]
duringfinetuning,andtunethelearningrate,batchsizeanddropout. Wetrainedthenetworksuntil
thein-distributionvalidationaccuracysettles(20000gradientstepsforparityand18000gradient
steps for variable assignment). The loss was only computed on the target tokens (i.e. the model
wasn’ttrainedtomodeltheinputquestions).
3.1 ScaleDoesn’tImproveLengthGeneralization
Parity: WefinetunedfourpretrainedLaMDAmodelswith244m,422m,1band64bparametersonthe
paritytask,wherethetrainingdistributionincludedrandomlysampledbitstringsoflength10to21.
Wethenevaluatedtheperformanceonbitstringsoflength3to40;seeFigure3. Wefindthatmodel
scalehasalittleeffectonlengthgeneralization.
VariableAssignment: Wefinetunedthesamemodelsonthechain-likeVariableAssignmentTask,
describedinSection2.Wekeptthein-distributionlengthsat3to8,andevaluatedthetestperformance
onlengths3to19. TheresultscanbeseeninFigure3. Justlikeintheparitytask, whilethein-
distributionperformanceis(near)perfect,out-of-distributionperformancedegradesrapidlyaslength
increases. Togetasenseofjusthowweaktheout-of-distributionperformanceis,wealsotrained
a 422m model on the same dataset, except we shuffled the operations before feeding it to the
model. Thisremovesthesequentialdependencybetweentheoperations,andhelpsusestablisha
2Weomitthenameofthemodelforthepurposeofanonymization.
4


=== Format as a Prior Quantifying and Analyzing Bias in LLMs for Heterogeneous Data.pdf ===
Format as a Prior:
Quantifying and Analyzing Bias in LLMs for Heterogeneous Data
JiachengLiu1,*,MayiXu1,*,QiankunPi1,Wenlili1,MingZhong1,YuanyuanZhu1,MengchiLiu1,
TieyunQian1,†
1SchoolofComputerScience,WuhanUniversity,China
{liu-jia-cheng,xumayi,qty}@whu.edu.com
Abstract Based on the following information, what disease does the patient have?
LargeLanguageModels(LLMs)areincreasinglyemployed Preliminary diagnosis notes in Text:
inapplicationsthatrequireprocessinginformationfromhet- …dry mouth has been reported...The current symptoms are insufficient
Text
erogeneous formats, including texts, tables, infoboxes, and to support a conclusive diagnosis of any chronic condition.
knowledgegraphs.However,systematicbiasestowardpartic-
ularformatsmayundermineLLMs’abilitytointegratehet- Auxiliary examination indicators in Table (a) Auxiliary examination indicators in KG (b)
erogeneous data impartially, potentially resulting in reason- Test Result Reference Range Reference FBG HbA1c Reference
Range Range
ing errors and increased risks in downstream tasks. Despite FBG 146 mg/dL 70-99 mg/dL Result Result
Table KG
theseconcerns,itremainsuncertainwhethersuchformatbi- HbA1c 7.2 % < 5.7% 1 m 4 g 6 /dL 7 m 0 g - / 9 d 9 L 7.2 % < 5.7%
ases are systematic, which data-level factors contribute to
them,andwhatinternalmechanismsinLLMsunderlietheir The symptoms do not support a The patient may have
emergence. chronic disease diagnosis. type 2 diabetes.
LLM LLM
Inthispaper,wemakethefirstattempttoinvestigateandan-
alyzetheformatbiasinLLMs.Tosystematicallyinvestigate Figure1:FormatbiasaffectstheLLM’sdecision.
theaforementionedquestions,weconductathree-stageem-
piricalstudybyconstructinganheterogeneousdataconflict
scenariofortheexplorationofbias.Thefirststageexplores
contextually relevant information (Lewis et al. 2020; Gao
the presence and direction of bias across a diverse range of
LLMs.Thesecondstageaimstoexaminehowkeydata-level etal.2023;HuangandChang2022).
factors,includinginformationrichness,structurequality,and In practice, external knowledge exists in diverse for-
formattype,influencethesebiases. mats,rangingfromunstructuredtextstosemi-structuredin-
The third stage analyzes how format bias emerges within foboxes,aswellasstructuredtablesandKnowledgeGraphs
LLMs’ attention patterns and evaluates a lightweight inter- (KGs).Thesedifferentsourcesofknowledgeoftencomple-
ventiontotestitseffectiveness.Basedontheseinvestigations,
mentoneanother,andtheabilitytoeffectivelyharnessthem
we identify three future research directions to reduce for-
together is crucial for real-world, knowledge-intensive ap-
mat bias: enhancing data pre-processing through format re-
plications.
pairandnormalization,introducinginference-timeinterven-
tionssuchasattentionre-weighting,anddevelopingformat- The presence of different formats introduces a critical
balancedtrainingcorpora.Thesedirectionswillsupportthe challenge: LLMs may not treat all formats equally when
designofmorerobustandfairheterogeneousdataprocessing leveraging these heterogeneous data collaboratively. An
systems. LLMwithstrongformatpreferencesinterpretsinformation
throughadistortedlens,givingundueweighttofavoredfor-
1 Introduction matsregardlessofactualrelevance.Thiscanaffectitsability
toreasonandsynthesizeeffectively.Forexample,inclinical
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated im-
decision support, an LLM is provided with both a doctor’s
pressive capabilities across a wide range of natural lan-
preliminarydiagnosisnotesandauxiliaryexaminationindi-
guage tasks (Brown et al. 2020). However, their practi-
cators. As illustrated in Figure 1 (a), when these indicators
cal deployment remains constrained by key limitations, in-
arepresentedintable,theLLM(e.g.,Qwen3-8b)placesdis-
cludingfactualinaccuracies(commonlyreferredtoas“hal-
proportionateemphasisonthetextualnoteswhileoverlook-
lucinations”) (Ji et al. 2023) and incomplete or outdated
ingcriticalinformationcontainedinthetable.Thisresultsin
knowledge (Petroni et al. 2019). One promising direction
anincorrectdiagnosis.Incontrast,asshowninFigure1(b),
to address these issues is to incorporate external knowl-
presentingtheindicatorsinaKGenablestheLLMtoiden-
edge sources into the reasoning process—allowing models
tify abnormalities, such as elevated blood sugar levels, and
to ground their outputs in more accurate, up-to-date, and
arriveatthecorrectdiagnosis.Similarly,theaforementioned
*JiachengLiuandMayiXuareco-firstauthors. phenomenon may widely arise in heterogeneous reasoning
†Correspondingauthor:TieyunQian (Christmann,SahaRoy,andWeikum2024),whichinvolves
5202
guA
31
]LC.sc[
1v39751.8052:viXra
knowledge-intensive questions from many domains, such awayformatheterogeneityusingsharedAPIsorembedding
as finance, science, and sports. When key evidence is dis- spaces (Xia et al. 2025; Min et al. 2024); and (2) LLM-
tributedacrosstexts,tables,infoboxesandKGs,LLMsmay centricpipelines,whichenhancedownstreamreasoningvia
focus on information from their preferred formats, poten- evidenceselection,re-ranking,ormodulartooluse(Christ-
tially overlooking crucial data in others. Such bias can re- mannandWeikum2024;Lehmannetal.2024;Zhangetal.
sultinincompleteorflawedconclusionsandunderminethe 2024;Biswaletal.2024).
LLMs’roleasimpartialandeffectivesynthesizersofhetero- However,existingworkoftenassumesthatonceevidence
geneousinputs. is retrieved, LLMs will evaluate it fairly based on content
Although there have been several studies exploring vari- alone.Ourstudyrevisitsthisassumptionbyaskingwhether
oustypesofbiasinLLMs,suchasbiasbetweenmulti-modal theformatinwhichevidenceispresentedcaninfluencethe
data (Zhu et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2025), there is a lack model’s judgment, even when the underlying meaning re-
of systematic research on format bias. To address this gap, mainsthesame.
wepresentthefirstcomprehensiveinvestigationandanaly-
sisofformatbiasinLLMs.Ourstudycentersonthreecrit-
2.2 LLMBehaviorunderConflictingEvidence
ical questions: whether such format biases are systematic,
whichdata-levelfactorscontributetothem,andwhatinter- Recent studies have uncovered a broad range of behavioral
nalmechanismsinLLMsunderlietheiremergence. biasesinLLMs,extendingbeyondsocialstereotypestosys-
Tosystematicallyinvestigatethethreequestions,wecon- tematicpatternsinreasoningandjudgment.Akeychallenge
duct a three-stage empirical study by constructing an het- lies in how LLMs handle conflicts—both between their
erogeneousdataconflictscenariofortheexplorationofbias. parametric knowledge (internal beliefs) and in-context ev-
The first stage explores the presence and direction of bias idence,andamongcompetingpiecesofevidence(Xuetal.
across a diverse range of LLMs. The second stage aims to 2024). LLMs tend to favor information aligned with their
examine how key data-level factors, including information pre-trainedknowledge,evenwhencontradictedbyaccurate
richness, structure quality, and format type, influence these inputs(Jinetal.2024a;Xieetal.2023).TheseLLMbiases
biases.Thethirdstageinvestigatestheemergenceofformat are shaped by factors such as entity popularity (Xie et al.
bias within LLMs’ attention mechanisms and evaluates a 2023), event recency (Fang et al. 2023), and evidence fre-
lightweight intervention strategy to assess its effectiveness quency (Jin et al. 2024a). Input artifacts also affect LLM
inmitigatingsuchbias. behavior, such as preferring self-generated content over re-
Ourkeycontributionsareasfollows: trievedpassages(Tanetal.2024).Relatedeffortshavealso
examinedknowledgeconflictsinmulti-modal(Zhangetal.
1. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to inves-
2025; Zhu et al. 2024) and multi-agent settings (Ju et al.
tigatetheissueofformatbiasinLLMsandtopresenta
2025), where preference biases and inter-agent inconsis-
comprehensive investigation of LLM biases toward dif-
tencyfurthercomplicatereasoning.
ferentknowledgeformatsacrossawiderangeofLLMs.
BenchmarkslikeConflictBank(Suetal.2024),WikiCon-
2. Weconductathree-stageempiricalstudytoexaminethe
tradict (Hou et al. 2024), and WhoQA (Pham et al. 2024)
presenceanddirectionofbias,identifythedata-levelfac-
have been proposed to evaluate how LLMs handle factual
torsthatgiverisetothebias,andinvestigatetheinternal
or semantic inconsistencies, especially in ambiguous sce-
mechanismsinLLMsthatcontributetotheirpresence.
narios. In response, a range of strategies have emerged,
3. Based on the comprehensive investigation, we identify
including conflict-aware decoding (Yuan et al. 2024; Jin
threefutureresearchdirectionsthatmayreducethefor-
etal.2024a),counterfactualdataaugmentation(Fangetal.
mat bias, which will contribute the development of a
2023), internal intervention via attention pruning (Jin et al.
moreeffectiveheterogeneousdataprocessingsystem.
2024b),neuronreweighting(Shietal.2024),orprompting
LLMstogeneratemulti-answerresponseswithsourceattri-
2 RelatedWork
bution(Shaier,Kobren,andOgren2024).
2.1 Heterogeneousreasoning Our work extends prior research by identifying a previ-
An important direction in AI research is to develop ouslyoverlookedsourceofbias:theformatinwhichinfor-
LLMscapableofreasoningoverheterogeneousknowledge mationispresented.Incontrasttoearlierstudiesthatfocus
sources,includingunstructuredtexts,tables,andKGs,espe- on content-level factors such as recency or frequency, we
cially when relevant evidence is dispersed across different showthatdifferencesinformatrepresentationalonecansys-
formats. However, existing methods often struggle to inte- tematicallyinfluenceLLMs’behavior.
grate such fragmented information effectively for accurate
inference. 3 InvestigationFramework
To formalize this challenge, recent benchmarks such as
COMPMIX(Christmann,SahaRoy,andWeikum2024)and This section establishes a framework for analyzing for-
CompMix-IR(Minetal.2024)requirecross-formatreason- matbiasinLLMs,encompassingdatasetconstruction,con-
ing,stimulatingthedevelopmentofhybridQAsystemsthat founding factor exclusion, and automated response evalu-
combinestructuredandunstructuredinputs. ation. The dataset construction process is detailed in Ap-
Current approaches can be broadly categorized into two pendix A of the Supplementary Material, with evaluation
types: (1) Unified retrieval frameworks, which abstract detailsinAppendixBoftheSupplementaryMaterial.
has_ confounding factors: internal knowledge bias and evidence
Isao director Grave of
The 1988 film 'Grave Takah the Title: Grave of the Fireflies presentationorder.
ata has_ Fireflies
of the Fireflies' was studio Director: Isao Takahata
directed by Isao has_ Studio: Studio Ghibli • Filtering Internal Knowledge: To ensure that LLM re-
pro T d a u k c a e h d a b t y a S an t d u dio S G t h u i d b i l o i r _ u m n i t n i u m t e es 89 KG Runtime: 89 minutes Inforbox sponsesarebasedonexternalevidenceratherthanpara-
Ghibli. Its runtime is metric memory, we adopt a filtering procedure consis-
89 minutes.
Film Title Director Studio Runtime Table tent with prior work (Gekhman et al. 2024). Each fac-
Text Gr F a i v r e e f o l f ie t s he Isao Takahata S G t h u i d b i l o i 89 minutes tualclaimistested16timesbydirectlyqueryingagiven
LLMwiththecorrespondingquestioninazero-shotset-
Figure2:Examplesofthefourdataformatsusedinourex- ting,andonlythosesamplesforwhichthemodelfailsto
periments:texts,tables,infoboxes,andKGs. reproducethefactualclaiminalltrialsareretained.
• Randomizing Evidence Order: To eliminate the known
biasintroducedbyinputorder(Xieetal.2023),weran-
3.1 DatasetandFormatConstruction
domize the sequence of all evidence segments for each
We construct our dataset based on ConflictBank (Su et al. input.
2024), a public corpus designed to evaluate LLM behav-
ior under factual conflicts. We randomly sample 4,000 en- 3.3 EvaluatedLLMs
tries, each containing one factual claim and three counter-
This evaluation covers ten LLMs across six major se-
claimswithcorrespondingsupportingevidence.Thisresults
ries: GPT-4o-mini (Achiam et al. 2023), LLaMA-3.1 (8B),
in 12,000 contradiction pairs, as each claim is paired in-
Mistral (7B), Qwen3 (8B, 14B, 30B-A3B, 32B) (Team
dividually with each of the three counterclaims. Each pair
2025), Gemma-2 (9B, 27B) (Team et al. 2024), and GLM-
consistsoftwodifferentclaimsaboutthesamesubjectand
4 (9B) (GLM et al. 2024). These LLMs span a range of
relation,eachsupportedbyitsownpieceofevidence.
sizes and architectures, enabling cross-family comparison
While the original evidence in ConflictBank is presented
offormat-drivenbiases.Toensurereproducibilityandelim-
inplaintext,ourgoalistoexaminehowLLMbehaviorisin-
inate stochasticity, all evaluations were conducted with a
fluencedbypresentingsupportingevidenceindifferentdata
temperaturesettingof0.
formats.Toconstructeachheterogeneouscontradictionpair,
we randomly convert the two pieces of evidence, each of
3.4 EvaluationProtocolandMetrics
whichsupportsadifferentclaimaboutthesamesubject,into
different formats. If the selected format is text, no conver- Given the scale of the dataset, we develop an automated
sionisapplied. evaluation pipeline using an LLM as an adjudicator. We
We use GPT-4o-mini as a transformation engine to con- employ GPT-4o-mini as the evaluation LLM. For each re-
vert selected texts into one of the following Wikipedia- sponse produced by the target LLM, we prompt the judge
inspiredformats. with explicit evaluation criteria to determine which of the
two conflicting claims the response aligns with, designated
• KGs:Asetof(Subject,Predicate,Object)triplescaptur-
asSourceAandSourceB.
ingcoresemanticrelations.
EachanswerisassessedbyGPT-4o-miniacrossthreein-
• Infobox: A structured key-value format modeled after dependent runs to ensure evaluation stability. The final la-
Wikipediainfoboxtemplates,summarizingfactualinfor- bel is determined via majority vote (i.e., at least two of the
mation. threejudgmentsmustagree).Thissetupenhancesevaluation
• Table: A tabular format styled after Wikipedia ta- consistencyandguardsagainstvarianceinLLMjudgment.
bles, presenting comparable facts in labeled rows and To further validate the reliability of this automated evalua-
columns. tion, we manuallyannotate a randomly sampled 5% subset
of the data and compare the results with the AI-generated
Figure2providesillustrativeexamplesofthesefourfor-
labels.Wecomputetheagreementratebetweenhumanand
mats,showinghowsemanticallyequivalentinformationcan
LLMjudgments,whichreached99.8%,indicatinghighcon-
bepresentedinstructurallydistinctways.Theseformatsre-
sistencybetweenhumanandLLMjudgments.
flectthemostcommonlyusedrepresentationsinpriorwork
Each LLM response is classified into one of three mutu-
onheterogeneousreasoning.
allyexclusivecategories:
Toverifytheintegrityofformatconversions,weconduct
manualinspectionsonarandomlysampled5%subsetofthe • Pref-A:Theresponsepredominantlyorexclusivelysup-
generateddata.Wecheckeachsampleagainsttwocriteria: portstheclaimfromSourceA.
(1)factualequivalencewiththesourcetextand(2)syntactic
• Pref-B:Theresponsepredominantlyorexclusivelysup-
validity of the target format. The factual accuracy rate was
portstheclaimfromSourceB.
98.7%,andthesyntacticvalidityratewas99.3%,reflecting
• Both:Theresponseacknowledgesthecontradictionand
strongdatafidelity.
presents both perspectives in a comparative or side-by-
3.2 ConfoundingFactorControl sidemanner.
Toensurethatourevaluationisolatestheeffectofevidence Allresponsesinourexperimentsfallunambiguouslyinto
formatitself,weimplementcontrolstoeliminatetwomajor one of these three categories, and no additional response
types are observed. This categorization enables two quan-
titativebiasmetricsusedthroughoutouranalysis.:
• Dual Coverage Rate (DCR): Measures the proportion
ofresponsesthatacknowledgebothclaims,indicatingan
LLM’scapacitytorepresentmultipleperspectives:
Both
DCR= (1)
Pref-A+Pref-B+Both
• FormatPreferenceRatio(FPR):Capturesasymmetric
bias between conflicting claims when an LLM gives a
single-sided response. For the A vs. B experiments, the
FPRiscalculatedas:
Pref-A
FPR= (2)
Pref-A+Pref-B
These two metrics correspond to the two bias types in- troduced earlier: DCR captures the presence of bias, while
FPRcapturesthedirectionofbias.
4 ExperimentalResultsandAnalysis
Inthissection,wepresenttheempiricalresultsofourthree-
stage investigation. Complete experimental details and raw
resultsareprovidedinAppendixCofSupplementaryMate-
rial.
4.1 EstablishingtheExistenceofFormatBias
Objective and Setup The primary aim of this initial ex-
perimentistotestthenullhypothesisthatLLMsprocessin-
formationinaformat-agnosticmanner.Tothisend,wecon-
ductalarge-scaleevaluationusingtheexperimentalframe-
work outlined in Section 3. We assess ten state-of-the-art
LLMs from various families and parameter scales. Each
LLM is evaluated on all six possible pairs among the four
target data formats: texts, tables, infoboxes, and KGs. This
designyields60uniqueexperimentalconditions(10LLMs
×6formatpairs),enablingacomprehensiveassessmentof
systematicformatbiases.
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP G 8 PT-4o- Q m w in e i n3-8B Q - w FP e 8 n3-14B Q - w FP e 8 n Q 3- w 3 e 2 n B 3 - - F 3 P 0 8 B-A G 3 e B m - m FP a- 8 2 G -9 e b m -i m t-F a P -2 8 -27b G -i L t- M FP M -4 8 i - s 9 t b ra -c l- h 7 a B t- - h In f struct-v0.3
RCD
FPR
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct-FP8 0.44* 0.63* 0.32* 0.50 0.45* 0.29*
GPT-4o-mini 0.19* 0.55* 0.24* 0.75* 0.45* 0.28*
Qwen3-8B-FP8 0.15* 0.53* 0.29* 0.82* 0.61* 0.28*
Qwen3-14B-FP8 0.20* 0.55* 0.31* 0.80* 0.56* 0.26*
Qwen3-32B-FP8 0.14* 0.53* 0.25* 0.85* 0.57* 0.25*
Qwen3-30B-A3B-FP8 0.14* 0.42* 0.26* 0.81* 0.56* 0.26*
Gemma-2-9b-it-FP8 0.35* 0.60* 0.34* 0.66* 0.44* 0.27*
Gemma-2-27b-it-FP8 0.27* 0.60* 0.36* 0.73* 0.56* 0.34*
GLM-4-9b-chat-hf 0.43* 0.58* 0.32* 0.61* 0.43* 0.26*
Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 0.15* 0.37* 0.17* 0.71* 0.48* 0.24*
infoboxes i n v f s o . b K o G xe s s vs in . f t o ab b l o e x s es vs. te K x G ts s vs. tabl K es Gs vs. te ta x b ts les vs. texts
Figure 4: Heatmap of FPR between format pairs across
LLMs. Asterisks (*) indicate statistical significance under
atwo-sidedbinomialtestwithnullhypothesisFPR=0.5.
Thefirstpattern,thepresenceofbias,ispervasiveunder
heterogeneousformatconditions.Thisisreflectedintheuni-
formlylowDualCoverageRate(DCR),rangingfrom3.01%
to 24.02%, indicating that LLMs often fail to acknowledge
conflicting information across different formats, typically
exhibitingapreferenceforoneinputwhiledisregardingthe
other.
Toisolatetheroleofformat,weintroduceacontrolcondi-
tionwherebothinputsarepresentedinplaintext.Asshown
in Figure 3, DCR increases markedly under this homoge-
neoussetting.Thiscontrasthighlightsabroaderpattern:for-
matheterogeneityalonecanindependentlyandsubstantially
impairamodel’sabilitytojointlyconsidermultipleinputs,
evenwhenthecontentissemanticallyequivalent.
Thislimitationpersistsacrossmodelsofvaryingsize,as
Heterogeneous no clear scaling trend is observed. For example, within the
Homogeneous
Qwen3 series, larger models do not exhibit improved per-
formanceinthisregard,suggestingthatincreasedparameter
sizealonedoesnotresolvethisformofprocessingasymme-
try.
Thesecond,andmoredecisive,patternisastrongdirec-
tionalbiasthatemergeswhenanLLMcommitstoasingle-
sided response. Despite considerable variation in architec- tureandscale,LLMsdemonstrateasurprisinglyconsistent pattern of format preferences. As shown in Figure 4, our
cross-model analysis reveals a clear preference hierarchy:
Figure3:AverageDCRacrossmodelsunderheterogeneous semanticallyrichformatssuchastextsandKGsareconsis-
andhomogeneousformats.Errorbarsshowstandarderror. tently favored over visually structured ones like infoboxes
and tables. Furthermore, when we group the data by topi-
Top-Level Findings Our results provide strong evidence caldomain,wefindthatthesebiasespersistacrossdomains,
againstthenullhypothesisofformatimpartiality,revealing suggesting that the observed biases are robust and general-
insteadaconsistentandmultifacetedpatternofbiasinboth izable.SeeAppendixC.7oftheSupplementaryMaterialfor
itspresenceanddirection. detaileddomain-levelresults.


=== From Lists to Emojis How Format Bias Affects Model Alignment.pdf ===
From Lists to Emojis: How Format Bias Affects Model Alignment
XuanchangZhang* 1, WeiXiong1∗, LichangChen2∗,
TianyiZhou2, HengHuang2, TongZhang1
1UniversityofIllinoisUrbana-Champaign
2UniversityofMarylandCollegePark
Abstract humanpreferences. Thisapproachhascontributed
to the tremendous successes of various state-of-
In this paper, we study format biases in re-
the-artLLMs,suchasGemini(Teametal.,2023),
inforcement learning from human feedback
Chat-GPT(OpenAI,2023),andClaude(Anthropic,
(RLHF). We observe that many widely-used
2023),bymakingthegeneratedresponseshelpful,
preferencemodels—includinghumanevalua-
tors, GPT-4, and top-ranking models on the harmless, honest and controllable (Ouyang et al.,
RewardBenchbenchmark—exhibitstrongbi- 2022; Bai et al., 2022). Despite its effectiveness,
asestowardsspecificformatpatterns,suchas RLHF also faces challenges. One notable issue
lists, links, bold text, and emojis. Further- is that policies optimized via RLHF tend to de-
more,largelanguagemodels(LLMs)canex- velop biases, leading them to “game” the reward
ploit these biases to achieve higher rankings
model(RM)i.e.,thepolicyreceivesahighreward
on popular benchmarks like AlpacaEval and
from RMs but does not achieve intended objec-
LMSYSChatbotArena.
tives. This behavior often results in performance
Onenotableexampleisverbositybias,where
degradation (Bai et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023), a
current preference models favor longer re-
phenomenon widely referred to as reward hack-
sponsesthatappearmorecomprehensive,even
ings(Denisonetal.,2024;Raméetal.,2024).
when their quality is equal to or lower than
shorterresponses. However,formatbiasesbe- Oneprevalentformofrewardhackingisthever-
yondverbosityremainlargelyunderexplored. bosityissue(Chenetal.,2024;Liu,2024;Singhal
Inthiswork,weextendthestudyofbiasesin etal.,2023),wherethepolicygeneratesunneces-
preferencelearningbeyondthecommonlyrec-
sarily lengthy responses in an attempt to appear
ognizedlengthbias,offeringacomprehensive
more helpful or comprehensive. However, many
analysisofawiderrangeofformatbiases. Ad-
othertypesofbiaspatternsbeyondtheverbosityre-
ditionally,weshowthatwithasmallamount
ofbiaseddata(lessthan1%),wecaninjectsig- mainlargelyunder-explored,especiallyinthecur-
nificantbiasintotherewardmodel. Moreover, rentmostpopularinstruction-following(IF)bench-
theseformatbiasescanalsobeeasilyexploited marks. RecentstudiesrevealLLMevaluatorsex-
bydownstreamalignmentalgorithms,suchas hibitinherentbiasesincludingself-preferencefor
best-of-n samplingandonlineiterativeDPO,
their own generations (Panickssery et al., 2024)
asitisusuallyeasiertomanipulatetheformat
andstyle-over-substancejudgments(WuandAji,
thantoimprovethequalityofresponses. Our
2023),whichfurthercomplicateevaluationvalid-
findingsemphasizetheneedtodisentanglefor-
ity. Inthisstudy,wearededicatedtoansweringthe
matandcontentbothfordesigningalignment
algorithmsandevaluatingmodels. followingquestion:
OnthecurrentpopularIFbenchmarks,dothe
1 Introduction
scorestrulyreflectmodels’capabilities?
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
Wefirstsummarizetheresponsestatisticsgener-
(RLHF)(Ziegleretal.,2019;Ouyangetal.,2022;
atedbythetop-rankingmodelsontheAlpacaEval
Baietal.,2022)hasbecomeacriticaltechniquein
Leaderboard(Lietal.,2023). Theresultsarepre-
theLLMtrainingpipelinetoaligntheoutputswith
sentedinTable1. Weobservethatallthemodels
*Equally contribution; more junior authors listed ear- stronglyprefergeneratedresponsesthatinclude
lierandthefullauthorshipcontributionstatementsarepro-
boldtext,lists,andexclamationpatterns. Addition-
vided in the Appendix. Correspondence to: Wei Xiong
<wx13@illinois.edu> ally,theGemmamodels(Teametal.,2024;Zhou
5202
yaM
32
]LC.sc[
2v40711.9042:viXra
et al., 2024) tend to incorporate more emojis in demonstratethatbothhumanevaluators,GPT-
their responses compared to Llama (Meta, 2024) 4,andarangeofopen-sourcepreferencemod-
and Mistral (Jianget al., 2023; Liu etal., 2024a). elsexhibitstrongbiasestowardtheseformats.
Although the proportion of responses containing 2. Existinghigh-rankingmodelsonthepublic
linksislesssignificant,wenoticethatAlpacaEval’s leaderboard exhibit strong format biases.
judge,GPT-4,tendstofavorresponseswithlinks Weshowthatmanyhigh-rankingmodelson
whentheyarepresent. Duetospaceconstraints,a publicleaderboardslikeAlpcaEval(Lietal.,
morecomprehensivestudyofthesebiasesinexist- 2023) and MT-bench (Zheng et al., 2023),
ingpreferencemodels,aredeferredtoSection2. tendtoexploitevaluatorbiasesbygenerating
The underlying cause of these reward hacking responseswithspecificbiasedformats.
phenomenaliesintheimperfectionsofthereward 3. Rewardmodelingcanbeeasilyattackedby
models used in RLHF. These models often suf- a small amount of biased data (less than
ferfromapproximationerrorsandlacksufficient 1%)andleadstosignificantformatbiases
representativenessduetothelimiteddiversityand in downstream alignment tasks. We show
numberofhumanlabelers. Forinstance,inatyp- thatintroducinglessthan1%biaseddatainto
ical RLHF setup, the target preference is that of a debiased preference dataset can cause the
real-world users, yet we rely on a small group of resulting reward models to develop substan-
human labelers to annotate the responses gener- tialformatbiases. Thesebiasesareeasilyex-
ated by LLMs. During the policy improvement ploitedbypolicymodelsduringdownstream
stage, a proxy reward model, constructed from alignment,especiallyinonlinealgorithmslike
these annotated responses, is ultimately used to iterative DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023; Xiong
providethelearningsignal. Asaresult,achievinga etal.) andPPO(Schulmanetal.,2017).
higherproxyrewarddoesnotalwayscorrelatewith 4. Passivedatafilteringisnotsufficientforre-
betterperformancewhenevaluatedbyreal-world wardmodeldebiasing. Wefindthatpassive
users. Eventhoughonebelievesthatsomeformat data filtering is inadequate, as it removes a
biasesareintrinsictohumanpreference,theycan substantial portion of the training data and
stillcauseproblemsindownstreamalignmenttasks leads to inferior model capacity. We also
if not explicitly addressed through regularization exploresatwo-headrewardconstructionap-
orspecializedalgorithmdesigns. Thisisbecause proachtodebiasrewardmodelsandaddressed
the most popular RLHF algorithms such as RAFT thesignalsparsityissueforspecificformats.
(Dongetal.,2023),onlineiterativeDPO(Rafailov
2 ThePatternBiasinPreference
etal.,2023;Xiongetal.),andPPO(Schulmanetal.,
Learning
2017) run in an on-policy (LLMs learn from the
self-generatedresponses)andonlinemanner(the
Inthissection,wesummarizesomerepresentative
reward continuously labels the self-generated re-
format biases and show that these biases widely
sponses throughout the training process). These
existinhuman,GPT-4,andotheropen-sourcepref-
format biases are much easier to exploit by the
erencemodels.
LLMs in pursuit of a higher reward compared to
improvingthecontentquality. Consequently,these 2.1 PatternStatisticsinPreferenceDatasets
biasescanbesignificantlyamplifiedintheonline andBenchmarks
andon-policytrainingpipeline.
Methods and datasets. To identify the format
In this work, we extend the study of biases in
biasesexistinginthepreferencemodels,weselect
preferencelearningbeyondthecommonlyexplored
severalrepresentativepreferencedatasetswithdif-
length bias, presenting a comprehensive analysis
ferent prompt distributions, response generators,
ofabroaderclassofpatternbiases. Ourfindings
andpreferencemodels.
emphasizetheimportanceofdisentanglingformat
andcontentinboththedesignofalignmentalgo- • RLHFlow-Preference-700K1 (Dong et al.,
rithmsandmodelevaluations. Wesummarizeour 2024)consistsof700Kpreferencepairsand
contributionsasfollows. hasbeenusedtotrainaseriesofstrongopen-
1. Formatbiaseswidelyexistinhuman,GPT- sourcerewardmodelsorpairwisepreference
4,andopen-sourcepreferencemodels. We
1https://huggingface.co/datasets/hendrydong/
identify several common format biases and preference_700K
RatioofResponseswithPattern(%)
Dataset Num Labeller Type Length
Bold List Emoji Exclamation Link Affirmative
Preferred 167.30 2.40 14.99 0.49 15.41 2.15 5.58
RLHFlow-Preference 700000 Mixture
Unpreferred 140.01 1.74 10.77 0.61 15.93 1.89 5.19
Preferred 191.64 7.61 38.84 0.73 18.52 1.20 7.30
LMSYS-Arena 49865 Human
Unpreferred 159.77 4.54 31.67 0.62 15.77 1.08 6.45
Preferred 325.43 42.76 61.73 1.99 23.34 1.58 10.08
AlpacaEval 169927 GPT-4
Unpreferred 239.36 16.78 49.96 1.40 21.84 1.32 9.11
Preferred 198.34 3.15 34.52 1.08 22.50 3.17 10.94
Ultrafeedback-binarized 61135 GPT-4
Unpreferred 175.48 2.62 27.88 1.00 23.96 2.32 11.73
Table1: Statisticssummarizationofdifferentpreferencedatasets.Wecomputetheproportionsofsampleswithcertainformats
inboththepreferredandunpreferredresponses.Forlength,wecomputethenumberofwordsoftheresponses.
Win-Rate(%)
Model Type
Bold List Emoji Exclamation Link Affirmative
GPT-4Turbo LLM-as-a-Judge 89.5 75.75 86.75 80.5 87.25 88.75
ArmoRM-Llama3-8B-v0.1 Multi-headRM 98 50.5 55 34.5 27 28.5
Pairwise-model-Llama-3-8B PairwisePM 97 93.5 70.5 64.25 84.75 47.75
FsfairX-Llama-3-8B-v0.1 BTRM 95.5 68.5 15 28.5 64.5 59.5
Skywork-Critic-Llama-3.1-8B GenerativeModel 99.25 88.75 97.25 77.75 75 85
Zephyr-Beta-Mistral-7B DPOModel 37.5 50 26.5 72 58 21
OffsetBias-RM-Llama-3-8B BTRM 77.5 84 28 38 62 30.5
Table2: Evaluationresultsofthepatternbiasoffivepopularpreferencemodels. Thistabledisplaystheadjustedwinrates,
accountingfortiedconditionsbyallocatinghalftothewinrate.Detailedproportionsofwins,ties,andlossesforeachmodelare
presentedinTable8.FortheDPOmodelZephyr-Beta-Mistral-7B,therewardiscomputedaslog π(a|x) ,whereπrepresents
π0(a|x)
themodelitselfandπ representsitsbasemodelZephyr-Beta-Mistral-7B.
0
models. This dataset is a cleaned version • UltraFeedback(Cuietal.,2023)consistsof
ofmanyopen-sourcepreferencedatasets,in- 64k prompts from diverse resources and the
cluding HH-RLHF (Bai et al., 2022), SHP authorsgenerate4responsesperpromptusing
(Ethayarajh et al., 2022), HelpSteer (Wang 4differentLLMs. Thepreferenceislabeled
etal.,2023),UltraFeedback(Cuietal.,2023), bytheLLM-as-a-judgewithGPT-4,basedon
UltraInteract (Yuan et al., 2024), Distilable- afine-grainedannotationinstruction. Specif-
Capybara, PKU-SafeRLHF (Ji et al., 2024), ically,theinstructioncontains4differentas-
andDistilabel-Orca(Lianetal.,2023). pects,includinginstruction-following,truth-
fulness,honesty,andhelpfulness.
• LMSYS-Arena-55K (Chiang et al., 2024),
which consists of 55K real-world conversa-
Foralldatasets,samplesareprocessedintothestan-
tionsbetweenusersand> 70state-of-the-art
dardformat(x,aw,al),whereaw ispreferredover
LLMs,aswellasthepreferencesignalsfrom
al according to the preference model. We would
the users. This dataset is prepared for the
like to compare the proportions of samples with
Kagglecompetitionofpredictinghumanpref-
certain formats in both the preferred and unpre-
erenceonChatbotArenabattles.
ferredresponses. Whenasignificantdifferencein
these proportions is observed, we identify it as a
• AlpacaEval(Lietal.,2023)isabenchmark
potentialbiaspattern.
to test models’ IF capabilities with 805 test
prompts. The generated responses from the
model are compared to the responses from Patterns. We identify seven distinct patterns
GPT-4, where the GPT-4 is also used as the within responses: length, emoji, bold, exclama-
judge. We collect the data from 258 tested tion, list, link, and affirmative. The examples of
LLMstoformthisdataset. thesepatternsareshowninAppendixC.
Results. WesummarizethemainstatisticsinTa- identicalexceptforthepattern,asequallyfavorable.
ble1andoutlinethemainfindingsasfollows: The results are summarized in Table 2, with key
1. BothGPT-4andhumansexhibitapreference observationsoutlinedbelow:
forlongersentences,bold,lists,exclamation
1. GPT-4displaysstrongbiasacrossallpatterns,
marks, and an affirmative tone. However,
whichalignswithourfindingsofpatternbias
GPT-4’spreferencefortheseelementsistypi-
intheGPT-4annotatedpreferencedatasetsin
callystrongerthanthatofhumans.
Table1.
2. GPT-4 also has a preference for emojis and
2. Pairwise-model-Llama-3-8B and Skywork-
hyperlinks,whichhumansdonotshare.
Critic-Llama-3.1-8Balsoexhibitbiasacross
3. The biases in the UltraFeedback dataset are
allpatterns.
lesspronounced. ThismaybebecauseUltra-
3. TheFsfairX-Llama-3-8B-v0.1model,trained
Feedbackexplicitlyassessescontext-related
on the RLHFlow-Preference dataset, shows
qualities such as helpfulness, instruction-
biasinallpatternsexceptforemojisandex-
following,honesty,andtruthfulness—factors
clamations,consistentwiththebiasstatistics
thatarelessdirectlyrelatedtoformatandde-
results of its training dataset highlighted in
terminethefinalpreferencelabelbytheaver-
Table1.
ageofthesescores. Incontrast,otherdatasets
4. ArmoRM-Llama3-8B-v0.1,whichexplicitly
relyongeneralpreferencejudgmentswithout
considers multiple context-related attributes
firstaskingforthefine-grainedscores.
when evaluating responses, reduces format
bias by focusing on aspects less directly re-
2.2 BiasEvaluationofPreferenceModel
latedtoformatting. However,ArmoRMstill
Inthissubsection,wecreateacollectionofevalua-
showsastrongbiastowardtheboldpattern.
tiondatasetstoexaminetheformatbiasesofGPT-4
5. The Zephyr-Beta-Mistral-7B model, trained
andopen-sourcepreferencemodels. Specifically,
ontheUltrafeedback_binarizeddataset,only
weincluderepresentativeopen-sourceBTreward
shows bias in exclamation and link patterns,
model(BradleyandTerry,1952;Dongetal.,2024),
consistentwiththebiasstatisticsresultsofits
pairwisepreferencemodel(Zhaoetal.,2023;Liu
trainingdatasethighlightedinTable1.
et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2024), multi-head reward
6. In particular, we notice that although Park
model(Wangetal.,2024b),generativecriticmodel
etal.(2024a)leveragesdebiaseddatatomit-
(Shiwenetal.,2024)andtherewardmodelofDPO
igate several implicit biases in the reward
model(Tunstalletal.,2023)inourexperiments.
modelFsfairX-Llama-3-8B-v0.1andobtaina
Evaluation dataset for specific patterns. We newdebiasedrewardmodelOffsetBias-RM-
generate responses using prompts from the Llama-3-8B,thedebiasedmodelstillshows
LMSYS-Arenadataset(Chiangetal.,2024). For considerablebiastowardboldandlistpatterns
each prompt, we generate responses from vari- because they do not explicitly consider the
ousmodels,includingMeta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct, formatbias. Moreover,thebiasinlistformat
Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct,Mistral-7B-Instruct- becomesmoresevereafterfinetuning.
v0.2,Gemma-2-9B-It,Qwen1.5-7B-Chat,Qwen2-
7B-Instruct, and ChatGLM3-6B. We then select
responsesthatexhibitthespecifiedpatternandre- 2.3 PatternBiasandPreferenceFlipping
movethispatternintheresponsestoobtainprefer-
encepairscontainingtworesponsesthatareiden- WuandAji(2023)demonstratedthatanswerscon-
ticalexceptforthispattern. Foreachpattern, we taining factual errors are sometimes rated more
generate200pairsforevaluation. favorably than those that are too brief or contain
grammatical mistakes. In our experiments, we
Evaluationresults. Foreachpreferencemodel,
observedinstanceswherestylisticenhancements,
we first evaluate the responses with and without
such as bold formatting, led GPT-4 to prefer re-
thepatterncollectedpreviously. Wethencompute
sponseswithinferiorcontentoverthosewithsupe-
thewinrateofresponseswiththepatternagainst
riorcontentbutlesspolishedstyle.
those without it. For an unbiased reward model,
the win rate should be close to 50%, indicating For detailed examples illustrating this phe-
that the model judges two responses, which are nomenon,pleaserefertotheAppendixD.


=== Is it Possible to Modify Text to a Target Readability Level.pdf ===
Is it Possible to Modify Text to a Target Readability Level? An Initial
Investigation Using Zero-Shot Large Language Models
Asma Farajidizaji, Vatsal Raina, Mark Gales
ALTAInstitute,UniversityofCambridge,UK
farajiasma@gmail.com,vr311@cam.ac.uk,mjfg@cam.ac.uk
Abstract
Text simplification is a common task where the text is adapted to make it easier to understand. Similarly, text
elaboration can make a passage more sophisticated, offering a method to control the complexity of reading
comprehension tests. However, text simplification and elaboration tasks are limited to only relatively alter the
readability of texts. It is useful to directly modify the readability of any text to an absolute target readability
level to cater to a diverse audience. Ideally, the readability of readability-controlled generated text should be
independentofthesourcetext. Therefore,weproposeanovelreadability-controlledtextmodificationtask. The
taskrequiresthegenerationof8versionsatvarioustargetreadabilitylevelsforeachinputtext. Weintroducenovel
readability-controlled text modification metrics. The baselines for this task use ChatGPT and Llama-2, with an
extensionapproachintroducingatwo-stepprocess(generatingparaphrasesbypassingthroughthelanguagemodel
twice). Thezero-shotapproachesareabletopushthereadabilityoftheparaphrasesinthedesireddirectionbutthe
finalreadabilityremainscorrelatedwiththeoriginaltext’sreadability. Wealsofindgreaterdropsinsemanticand
lexicalsimilaritybetweenthesourceandtargettextswithgreatershiftsinthereadability.
Keywords:Languagecontrol,Readability,Textmodification
1. Introduction
Naturallanguageconsistsofinformationthatiscon-
veyed for a targeted audience. In order to make
the text appropriate for a diverse set of readers,
thesourcetextneedstobemodifiedaccordingly.
Automatictextsimplificationisapopularnaturallan-
guageprocessing(NLP)taskwherethesourcetext
isadaptedtomakethecontenteasiertounderstand
byreducingitslinguisticcomplexity(Siddharthan,
2014;SikkaandMago,2020). Typicallysuchsim-
plification solutions are valuable for various audi-
encesincludingyoungerreaders(DeBelderand
Moens,2010),foreignlanguagespeakers(Bingel Figure1: Exampleforthereadability-controlledtext
etal.,2018),dyslexics(Relloetal.,2013),sufferers modification task. The source text from CLEAR
ofautism(Evansetal.,2014)andaphasics(Carroll (Crossley et al., 2023) is paraphrased at various
etal.,1998). Similarly,textelaborationoffersmeth- target readability levels according to the Flesch
odstomakecontentmorechallengingforreading readingeasescore(FRES)(Flesch,1948).
comprehension tasks and hence cater to higher
levelstudents(Rossetal.,1991).
However,bothtextsimplificationandelaboration regardlessofthenatureofthesourcetext,itcan
are able to only relatively control the readability bemodifiedtoanyotherreadabilitylevel.
of the text. This means that the generated text Toaddresstherelativenatureofcurrenttextmod-
issimplified/elaboratedrelativetotheoriginaltext ificationapproaches,weproposeanoveltextmod-
documentbutitdoesnotguaranteethetextitself ificationtasktocontroltextreadability(Harrisand
isatanappropriatereadabilitylevelforthetarget Hodges, 1995). Given a set of text documents
audience. Inanidealsetting,itshouldbepossible across the whole spectrum of readability levels,
tomodifyatextdocumenttoapreciseandabsolute generate8versionsforeachdocumentcorrespond-
readabilitylevel. Pertinently,thereadabilityofthe ingtodifferenttargetreadabilitylevels. Precisely,
modified text should be independent and uncor- thetargetreadabilityscoresarerangingfrombeing
related with the source text’s readability. Hence, readablefora5th gradestudenttounderstandable
foruniversitygraduates(Flesch,1948).
AsmaFarajidizajididtheresearchincollaboration Paraphrasing is a common NLP task where a
withtheALTAInstitute sourcetextismodifiedtoconveythesamemean-
4202
yaM
72
]LC.sc[
2v15521.9032:viXra
ingbutusingdifferentwordsorsentencestructures summariestolongertexts. Beyondstructuralcon-
(Zhou and Bhat, 2021). Hence, automated para- trol,Yamagishietal.(2016)controlsthevoiceofthe
phrasing solutions offer an opportunity to modify translationwhileSennrichetal.(2016)controlsthe
text to various target readability levels. However, honorificsandpolitenessastheselectedattributes.
standard solutions do not attempt to control the Summarization is a standard natural language
readabilityofthegeneratedparaphraseandusu- generationtaskwhereasourcetextmustbecon-
allyaimtomaintainconsistencywiththesourcetext densedwhilstmaintainingthecoreelementsofthe
(Kumar et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020). Despite original passage. Automatic summarization has
thelackofflexibilityoftheseparaphrasingmodels, observedthecontrolofvariousattributesincluding
the remarkablegrowthof large-scaleautoregres- length,entity-centric,source-specificandlinkedto
sive foundation models (Zhou et al., 2023) have aparticularportion ofthe sourcedocument(Fan
demonstrated capabilities across a broad range etal.,2018).
of NLP tasks with simple prompting (Sanh et al.,
In text generation, Zhang et al. (2022) states
2021). Thus, thebaselinesolutionsforthenovel
that the attributes to control are grouped into 3
taskinourworkusezero-shot(Brownetal.,2020)
distinctcategories: semantic,structuralandlexical.
promptingofsuchmodelsastheirbackbonesfor
Semantic control involves the control of emotion
readability-controlledparaphrasing.
(Chenetal.,2019;Dathathrietal.,2019)suchas
Thetextmodificationapproachesthatgenerate
sentimentofthegeneratedtextaswellthechoiceof
the eight adaptations of each source text docu-
thetopic(Khalifaetal.,2020)beingdiscussedand
ment are assessed for their ability to control the
thedegreeoftoxicity(Krauseetal.,2021;Liuetal.,
readability. Theproposedmetricsassessboththe
2021)inthetext. Structuralcontroltypicallylooks
readability control at an individual example level
atdefiningthesyntaxinthegeneratedtextandthe
and the population level. At the individual scale,
occurrenceofgraphsandtables(Puduppullyetal.,
weassess,withvariousmetrics,whethertheread-
2019;Ribeiroetal.,2021). Finally,lexicalcontrol
abilityofatextapproachesthetargetvalue. Atthe
intextgenerationfocusesonattributessuchasthe
populationscale,weexploretheextenttowhichthe
inclusionofkeywordsorphrases(Carlssonetal.,
measuredreadabilityofageneratedtextdocument
2022;He,2021).
isconditionalonthesourcetextdocument’sread-
Besidescontrollingofattributes,therehavebeen
ability. Additionally,weexplorethebehaviourofthe
attemptstocontroltextsimplificationtospecifictar-
modifiedtextsforeachtargetreadabilitylevelac-
get readability levels. For example, Alkaldi and
cordingtostandardparaphrasingmetrics. Agood
Inkpen(2023)makesuseoftheNewseladataset
paraphrasecanexpecttobelexicallydivergentbut
(Xuetal.,2015)tosimplifychallengingnewsarti-
semanticallysimilartothesource.
clestofourdifferentreadabilitylevels. Incontrast,
Ourcontributionscanbesummarizedasfollows:
theworkinthispaperemphasisestheneedtobe
• Introduction of a novel task for readability- abletotaketextofanysourcereadabilitytoanytar-
controlledtextmodification. getreadability. Hence,textelaborationisimportant
alongsidetextsimplification.
• Definitionofappropriateevaluationmetricsfor
controllingreadability.
• In-depthanalysisofzero-shotlargelanguage 3. Text Readability
modelsolutionsforcontrollingtextreadability
withparaphrasing. Textreadabilityassesseshoweasyapieceoftextis
toread. Severalstandardmeasuresexistformea-
suringthereadabilityoftextincludingtheFlesch-
2. Related Work
Kincaid Grade Level (Kincaid et al., 1975), Dale
Inthisworkwefocusoncontrollabilityintextmodifi- Chall Readability (Dale and Chall, 1949), Auto-
cationforreadability. Previousworkshaveexplored matedReadabilityIndex(ARI)(SenterandSmith,
similarapproachesandtaskstocontrolvariousat- 1967), Coleman Liau Index (Coleman and Liau,
tributesacrossadiverserangeofnaturallanguage 1975),GunningFog(Gunningetal.,1952),Spache
tasks. Here,wediscussthecontrolofattributesin (Spache,1953)andLinsearWrite(Klare,1974).
machinetranslation(Logeswaranetal.,2018),au- In this work, the Flesch reading-ease (Flesch,
tomaticsummarizationandtextgeneration(Zhang 1948)score(FRES)isusedwherehigherscores
etal.,2022). indicatematerialthatiseasiertoreadwhilelower
Machine translation is a natural language gen- scoresarereflectiveofmorechallengingpassages.
erationtaskthattranslatesasourcetextintoadif- Thescoreaccountsfortheratioofthenumberof
ferentlanguage. Kikuchietal.(2016)investigates words to the number of sentences and the ratio
the ability to control the length of generated sen- ofthenumberofsyllablestothenumberofwords
tences such that translations can vary from brief todeterminetheoverallreadabilityasindicatedin
Equation11. 4. Readability-Controlled Text
Modification
4.1. Task definition
(cid:16)n (cid:17) (cid:16)n (cid:17)
FRES=206.835−1.015 w −84.6 sy (1)
n n Thereadability-controlledtextmodificationtaskis
se w
definedasfollows:
wheren denotesthetotalnumberofwords,n
w se “Given a text paragraph x, a function F for
denotes the total number of sentences and n
sy calculatingreadabilityscores,andK pre-defined
denotesthetotalnumberofsyllables.
readability scores r , r , ..., r , generate K
1 2 K
versionsofx(y ,y ,...,y ),suchthatF(y )=r ,
1 2 K 1 1
Range Level(US) Description F(y 2 )=r 2 ,...,F(y K )=r K .”
0-10 Professional Extremelydifficulttoread.
In this work, K = 8 with r = 5, r = 20,
Best understood by uni- 1 2
r = 40, r = 55, r = 65, r = 75, r = 85,
versitygraduates. 3 4 5 6 7
r =95andFRES(seeEquation1)isselectedas
8
10-30 Collegegraduate Verydifficulttoread. Best
the readability function, F. This task is applied
for every text in a dataset of text paragraphs.
understoodbyuniversity
graduates. The target readability scores are selected as the
halfwayvaluesforeachrangeofFRESfromTable
30-50 College Difficulttoread. 1.
50-60 10-12thgrade Fairlydifficulttoread.
4.2. Evaluation
60-70 8-9thgrade PlainEnglish. Easilyun- The quality of the readability-controlled text
derstood by 13- to 15- modificationsgeneratedareassessedaccording
year-oldstudents. to individual and population scale control in
readability as well as additional analysis with
70-80 7thgrade Fairlyeasytoread.
standardparaphrasingmetrics.
80-90 6thgrade Easy to read. Conver-
sational English for con- Individual-scale readability control: For
each example in a test set, 8 paraphrases are
sumers.
generated. Theindividual-scalereadabilitycontrol
90-100 5thgrade Veryeasytoread. Easily metricsassesstheabilitytoappropriatelycontrol
understoodbyanaverage thereadabilityoftheseparaphrasesforeachindi-
11-year-oldstudent. vidual example. Broadly, the ranking, regression
andclassificationabilitiesofareadability-controlled
Table 1: Interpretable meaning of FRES (Flesch, paraphrasegeneratorareassessed.
1948). Letxdenotetheoriginaltextsequence,y de-
(r)
note the generated paraphrase with target read-
abilityscoreofr ∈R={5,20,40,55,65,75,85,95}.
FRESisselectedasasimplemeasureforread-
LetF(·)representthefunctionforcalculatingFRES
ability because it has highly interpretable ranges
fromEquation1.
forthescoreaswellasahighcorrelationwithhu-
Therankingabilityisassessedbycalculatingthe
mancomprehensionasmeasuredbyreadingtests
Spearman’srankcorrelationcoefficient,ρ,between
(DuBay,2007). Forexample,Table1showsthat the8valuesofF (cid:0) y (cid:1)andR. Hence,herewe
aFRESscorebelow10indicatesthetextisread- (r∈R)
only assess whether the order of the generated
able by university graduates, FRES in the fifties
paraphrasesalignswiththeirtargetreadabilities.
istargetedfor10−12th gradewhileFRESabove
Given the target readability scores, the regres-
90 is readable for 5th grade students. Such well
sionabilityofthemodelisassessedbycalculating
definedrangesallowsanexplorationoftheability
the root mean square error (rmse) between the
forcontrollingthereadabilityoftext. Note,FRES
actual and target readability scores of the para-
isnotstrictlyconstrainedtobeintherangeof0to
phrases.
100.
" #1/2
1 X
rmse= (F(y )−r)2 (2)
8 (r)
r∈R
1Implementationavailableat: https://pypi.org/
project/py-readability-metrics/ Finally,theclassificationabilitycheckstheability
oftheparaphrasegeneratortocontrolthereadabil- expecttohaveahighself-WER.BERTScorecom-
ity of the generated text into the target range as pares the semantic similarity of the source and
definedinTable1. Forexample,aparaphrasewith paraphrasebycalculatingthepairwisecosinesimi-
atargetreadabilityof65isdeemedcorrectifthe laritiesbetweenpre-computedBERT(Kentonand
measuredgeneratedtextreadabilityisintherange Toutanova, 2019) token embeddings of each of
of 60-70 and incorrect otherwise. Therefore, the thetexts. Hence,theF1metricisreportedasthe
classificationaccuracycanbecalculatedaccording harmonicmeanofprecisionandrecall.
toEquation3.
accuracy= 1 X 1 (F(y )) (3) 5. Experiments
8 A(r) (r)
r∈R
5.1. Data
where A ∈ [0,10], A ∈ [10,30], A ∈
(5) (20) (40)
[30,50], A ∈ [50,60], A ∈ [60,70], A ∈ CLEAR (Crossley et al., 2023, 2021) is a large-
(55) (65) (75)
[70,80],A ∈[80,90],A ∈[90,100]. scaledcorpusforassessingtextreadability. Here,
(85) (95)
For the ranking, regression and classification itisusedasatestsetofinputpassagesonwhich
metrics,themeanisreportedacrossthetestsetof readability-controlledtextmodificationisperformed.
examples. Table 2 outlines the main statistics. There are
roughly5000differenttextswithameanof10sen-
Population-scale readability control These tences, allowing the text modification task to be
metricsassesstheactualreadabilityofeachtarget performedatthepassage-levelratherthanatthe
readability across a whole population (test set) sentence-level.
ratherthanconsideringeachexampleindividually.
In particular, an important aspect of readability
#examples #words #sentences #paragraphs
control requires the controlled readability of the
generatedtexttobedecorrelatedandindependent 4,724 179 ±18 9.6 ±4.6 2.5 ±1.9
with the source passage readability. In principle,
Table2: CLEARdatasetstatistics.
theoriginaltextshouldnothaveanyinfluenceon
thereadabilityofthegeneratedtextifthecontrolof
theparaphrasegeneratorisideal.
Otherstandarddatasetsexistfortextsimplifica-
First,wereportthePearson’scorrelationcoeffi-
tionbutthesearegenerallyatthesentence-level
cient(pcc)betweenthesourcereadabilityandthe
(Sunetal.,2021)whilewefocusonlongertexts. Al-
calculatedgeneratedtextreadabilityseparatelyfor
ternatively,variouspopularpassage-leveldatasets
eachtargetreadabilityclass. Ideally,adecorrelated
existinreadingcomprehensionandparaphrasing
scoreshouldexpectpcc=0.
literature. Figure2comparesthedistributionofthe
Additionally,alinearregressionlineoftheform
FRESforthepassageswithinCLEAR,theSQuAD
of y = ax+b is calculated for each target read- (Rajpurkaretal.,2016)developmentsetandNews-
ability class between the source and generated
Commentary(Linetal.,2021)testset. Duetothe
text readability scores. In an ideal setting, the
presence of texts across the whole spectrum of
regressionlineshouldapproachagradienta=0.
FRES scores, CLEAR is an attractive choice for
investigatingreadability-controlledtextmodification.
Standard paraphrasing A good paraphrase Hence,theexperimentshereareconductedonthe
should be lexically divergent but semantically
CLEARdatasetonly.
similartotheoriginaltext(GleitmanandGleitman,
1970; Chen and Dolan, 2011; Bhagat and Hovy,
2013). In line with Lin et al. (2021), we assess 5.2. Zero-shot
lexicaldivergenceusingself-WER(Och,2003)2.
SemanticsimilarityisassessedusingBERTScore Large-scalegenerativefoundationmodels(Brown
(Zhangetal.,2019)3. et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Scao et al.,
Self-WERcalculatestheworderrorrate(WER) 2022), including the popularized ChatGPT, have
(inspiredfromautomaticspeechrecognition(Malik demonstratedstate-of-the-artperformanceacross
et al., 2021) and machine translation (Lee et al., alargerangeofnaturallanguagetasksinzero-shot
2023))betweenthesourceandgeneratedtextre- and few-shot settings. Despite not having been
spectively. A lexically divergent paraphrase can specifically trained on certain tasks, these mod-
els are capable of successfully performing novel
2Implementation available at: https://github. taskswithnaturallanguageprompting. Therefore,
ourbaselinesolutionsforreadability-controlledtext
com/belambert/asr-evaluation
3Implementation available at: https://github. modificationinvolvezero-shotsolutionsusingChat-
com/Tiiiger/bert_score GPT and Llama-2 (Touvron et al., 2023). Specif-


=== Length-Controlled AlpacaEval A Simple Way to Debias Automatic Evaluators.pdf ===
Length-Controlled AlpacaEval:
A Simple Way to Debias Automatic Evaluators
YannDubois1,BalázsGalambosi2,PercyLiang1andTatsunoriB.Hashimoto1
1StanfordUniversity 2IndependentResearcher
Abstract
LLM-basedauto-annotatorshavebecomeakeycomponentoftheLLMde-
velopmentprocessduetotheircost-effectivenessandscalabilitycompared
tohuman-basedevaluation. However,theseauto-annotatorscanintroduce
biases that are hard to remove. Even simple, known confounders such
aspreferenceforlongeroutputsremaininexistingautomatedevaluation
metrics. Weproposeasimpleregressionanalysisapproachforcontrolling
biasesinauto-evaluations. Asarealcasestudy,wefocusonreducingthe
lengthbiasofAlpacaEval,afastandaffordablebenchmarkforinstruction-
tunedLLMsthatusesLLMstoestimateresponsequality. Despitebeing
highlycorrelatedwithhumanpreferences,AlpacaEvalisknowntofavor
models that generate longer outputs. We introduce a length-controlled
AlpacaEvalthataimstoanswerthecounterfactualquestion: "Whatwould
the preference be if the model’s and baseline’s output had the same
length?"Toachievethis,wefirstfitageneralizedlinearmodeltopredict
thebiasedauto-annotator’spreferencesbasedonthemediatorswewantto
controlfor(lengthdifference)andotherrelevantfeatures. Wethenobtain
length-controlledpreferencesbypredictingpreferenceswhileconditioning
the GLM with a zero difference in lengths. Length-controlling not only
improvestherobustnessofthemetrictomanipulationsinmodelverbosity,
wealsofindthatitincreasestheSpearmancorrelationwithLMSYSChatbot
Arenafrom0.94to0.98. Wereleasethecodeandresultingleaderboard.
1 Introduction
Figure1: AlpacaEvallength-controlledincreasescorrelationwiththeLMSYSChatbotArena
from0.94to0.98. Itiscurrentlytheautomaticbenchmarkwiththehighestcorrelationwith
ChatbotArena.
DevelopingandimprovingNLPsystemsrequiresreliable,low-costevaluationsthatcan
quantifyprogress. Inclosed-endedtasks,suchasmultiple-choiceQA,suchevaluationsare
straightforwardtoimplementandtrust(Novikovaetal.,2017;Yehetal.,2021). However,
suchevaluationscannotbeappliedtoopen-endedsettingssuchasinstructionfollowing
forlanguagemodels. Evenneuralreference-basedevaluationmetricssuchasBERTscore
(Zhang*etal.,2020)facechallengesinthosesettingsduetothedifficultyofcollectinga
diversesetofreferencesthatcancoverthespaceofvalidoutputs.
1
5202
raM
01
]GL.sc[
2v57440.4042:viXra
Recently, therehasbeenapushtowardreference-freeevaluationmethodsthatleverage
high-performanceLLMs,e.g. AlpacaEval(Lietal.,2023),MTBench(Zhengetal.,2023),and
WildBench(Linetal.,2024). Whiletheseapproachesshowahighcorrelationwithhuman
annotators,theyoftendosobyexploitingspuriouscorrelationssuchasthelengthofthe
output,thepresenceoflists,orvariouspositionbiasesLietal.(2023);Zhengetal.(2023);
Kooetal.(2023);Wangetal.(2023);Wu&Aji(2023).
Creatingawaytodebiasautomatedevaluationmetricswouldbehighlyvaluable–itwould
addressthemajordrawbackofLLM-basedreference-freeevaluationsandenablelow-cost,
accurateevaluationsfordevelopingNLPsystemsinopen-endedsettings. Ourworkfocuses
onthischallengeoftakinganexistingautomatedevaluationmetric(e.g. AlpacaEval)anda
suspectedspuriouscorrelate(e.g. length)andproducingadebiasedmetric.
Weproposeasimple,interpretabledebiasingstrategyforautomatedevaluationmetrics
basedonbasic,regression-basedadjustmentsforobservationalcausalinference. Weview
spuriouscorrelates–suchasthelengthoftheresponse–asundesirablemediatorsVander-
Weele(2015)inacausalgraphanduseregression-basedcausalinferenceHernán&Robins
(2010)techniquestoprovidesimpleadjustmentstoautomatedevaluationsthatcontrolfor
anysuspectedspuriousvariables.
ApplyingthisapproachtothepopularAlpacaEvalbenchmark,weshowthatcontrolling
forlengthpositivelyaffectsautomatedevaluation. Wefindthatitismorecorrelatedon
averagewiththeLMSYSChatbotArena(Zhengetal.,2023)thanboth(length-uncontrolled)
AlpacaEvalandMT-bench,andthatitissignificantlymorerobusttogamingtheevaluation
byincreasingtheverbosityoftheoutput.
Ourcontributionsarethefollowing:
• We propose a simple regression-based approach to debias automated metrics, while
maintainingdesirableproperties.
• WeapplytheapproachtoAlpacaEval,producingAlpacaEval-LC,whichismorerobust
tolength-basedspuriouscorrelates.
• We show that AlpacaEval-LC correlates better with the human evaluations of model
rankings(ChatbotArena)Fig.1.
2 BackgroundandProblemSetting
Ourworkrelatestoboththeclassicliteratureonreference-freeevaluations,aswellasmore
recentdevelopmentsinautomatedandhumanevaluationofchatbots. Wedescribesomeof
theserelevantworksbelow,withsomeadditionalexpositiononthedetailsofAlpacaEval,
whichwestudymorecloselyinourdebiasingexperiments.
Reference-freeevaluationmetrics. Reference-freeevaluationmetrics,whichaimtoevalu-
atemodelsonopen-endedtaskswithoutusinganyreferenceansweronthattask,havea
longhistory,includingclassicmethods(Louis&Nenkova,2013)andmorerecentneural
supervisedlearningmethods(Kryscinskietal.,2020;Sinhaetal.,2020;Goyal&Durrett,
2020). Whilethislatterclassofalgorithmshasbecomesufficientlyaccuratethattheymatch
inter-annotatoragreementrates,otherworkshaveshownthatsuchmeasurementsareheav-
ilyconfoundedbyspuriouscorrelationssuchasperplexityandlength(Durmusetal.,2022).
Recently,therehasbeenapushtoleverageLLMsasazero-shot,reference-freeevaluation
measure(Zhengetal.,2023;Duboisetal.,2023;Lietal.,2023;Linetal.,2024). Inthechat
setting,twowell-knownsuchbenchmarksareAlpacaEvalandMT-bench,bothofwhich
queryanLM(basedonGPT-4)toassessthequalityofaweakerLM’soutput.
AlpacaEval. AlpacaEvalisanLLM-basedautomatedevaluationmetric–itoperatesona
fixedsetof805instructionschosentoberepresentativeofuserinteractionsontheAlpaca
webdemo(Taorietal.,2023). Foreachinstruction,bothabaselinemodelb(currentlyGPT-4
turbo) and the evaluated model m produce responses. A GPT-4 turbo-based evaluator
thencomparestheresponseshead-to-headandoutputstheprobabilityofpreferringthe
2
evaluatedmodel. Awinrateisthencomputedastheexpectedprobabilitythattheauto-
evaluatorpreferstheevaluatedmodel’soutputonthe805instructions. Thiswinrateserves
asaperformancemeasureoftheevaluatedLMchatbot.
Originally,AlpacaEvalwasdesignedasadevelopmentmetricfortheAlpacainstruction-
followingmodel(Taorietal.,2023)andAlpacaFarmsimulator(Duboisetal.,2023). The
metricwasdesignedtocontrolforcertainbiases,suchastheorderinwhichthemodeland
baselinewerepresented,byrandomizingtheirsequence. However,otherfactorslikelength
and style effects were not controlled for, as the authors found that humans had similar
biasesontheanalyzeddata. SubsequentuseofAlpacaEvalasaleaderboardrevealedthat
theseuncontrolledbiasescouldbesignificantlygamedbyAIsystemsinwaysthathuman
biaseswouldlikelynothave.
ImportanttoourworkisthatAlpacaEvalhasseveralinterpretableproperties. Asawinrate,
itsvaluesarein[0%,100%],ithasasymmetrytobaselineswaps,i.e,AlpacaEval(b,m) =
100%−AlpacaEval(m,b),i.e.,andcomparingabaselinetoitselfisAlpacaEval(b,b) =50%
Any post-hoc correction to AlpacaEval should maintain these properties, alongside the
usualdesiderataofbeinglow-cost,accurate,androbustness.
ChatbotArena. TheautomatedapproachtopairwiseevaluationinAlpacaEvalcanbe
viewedasalow-costapproximationtotheChatbotArena(Zhengetal.,2023),whichaims
tobuildreal-worldhumanevaluationsthroughliveinteractions. TheapproachinChatbot
ArenaisthatusersarepresentedwithapairofanonymizedLMs,andtheycansendan
instructiontobothLMssimultaneously. TheuserreceivesresponsesfrombothLMsand
ratestheresponsethatisofhigherquality. Intheend,thehead-to-headcomparisonsare
converted to Elo ratings (Elo, 1978) which serve as model scores. The difference in Elo
ratingsbetweentwoplayerscanbeconvertedtoawinrate,andviceversa(Elo,1978).
Thisapproachhasmanydesirableproperties–itisdrivenbyrealusersandthedynamic
natureoftheinstructionsmakesithardtosaturatethisbenchmark.However,thismetriccan-
notbeusedformodeldevelopmentduetothecostofrunningmanylivehumanevaluations.
Intheremainderofthiswork,wewilltreattheChatbotArenaasasilverstandard,whichwe
wishtoapproximate. AlthoughChatbotArenalikelystillcontainsbiases(e.g. internetusers
mayfocusonsurfacefeaturesratherthan“hardtomeasure”capabilitiessuchasfactuality),
itrepresentsthelargestpubliclyavailablehumanevaluationprocesstoday.
Setup. Wedefinetheproblemofpairwiseevaluationofalanguagemodelinthefollowing
way. Givenaninstructionxsampledfromadistribution p(x),abaselinemodelgenerates
aresponsez andtheevaluatedmodelgeneratesaresponsez . Ahumanannotatorthen
b m
producesapreferencey ∈ {0,1}indicatingwhetherthecandidateresponsez (y = 1)is
m
betterthanthebaselineresponsez (y =0).AnautomatedsurrogatesuchasAlpacaEvalisa
b
(potentiallyrandomized)predictor f(z ,z ,x)thataimstoapproximatethecorresponding
m b
human label p(y|z ,z ,x). AlpacaEval’s current metric is the win rate winrate(m,b) of
m b
the candidate model m over the baseline b. I.e., the expected predicted preference of
human annotators for the model response over the baseline’s response winrate(m,b) =
100·E [f(z ,z ,x)].
x m b
3 Length-ControlledAlpacaEval
Amajorchallengeinestimatingpreferences f(z ,z ,x)isthespuriouscorrelationsproblem.
m b
Specifically,considerasimpleexampleinwhichthereisaspuriouscorrelatec(e.g. length)
such that heavily relying upon c can be predictive of the human preferences y between
themodel’sandbaseline’soutput. Theconfoundercisinitiallypredictiveofybutcould
becomelesspredictiveasmodelbuildersexplicitlybegintooptimizeagainstthemetric.
Adoptingthiscausalview,weaskourmotivatingquestion:
WhatwouldtheAlpacaEvalwinratebe,iftheoutputsoftheevaluated
modelmhadthesamelengthasthoseofthebaselineb?
3
Ourgoalinthissectionwillbetooperationalizethisintoasimpleregression-basedestimator.
Tobeprecise,wehypothesizethatautomatedevaluationmeasures f suchasAlpacaEval
returntheirqualityestimatesthroughacombinationofdirecteffectsthatmeasurethequality
ofthemodelresponseandindirecteffectsthataremediatedbyspuriousvariablessuchas
thelengthofoutputs. Thegoalofcontrollingforthespuriouscorrelatesisthusequivalent
tocontrollingtheseindirecteffects. SeeFig.2foravisualrepresentation.
Figure2: Length-ControlledAlpacaEvalpredictsthedirecteffectofthemodel(blue)onthe
auto-annotators’preference(white)whencontrollingforundesirablemediators(orange)
andotherusefulfeatures(gray).
This abstraction leads us to a simple approach for bias correction, inspired by methods
forestimatingControlledDirectEffect(VanderWeele,2010),forwhichsimpleGeneralized
LinearModels(GLMs)canprovidereasonableestimates.
Length control via regression. Our approach will be to estimate the contribution of 3
differentcomponentstotheAlpacaEvalqualityjudgment:
• ModelidentityWhetheranoutputcomesfromthebaselinemodelbortheevaluated
modelmshouldimpacttheprobabilitythatanoutputwinsthepairwisecomparison.
• LengthofoutputThelengthofoutputisknowntoaffectbothhumanandmodeljudg-
mentsofoutputquality(Duboisetal.,2023;Singhaletal.,2023),andsoweexpectthisto
alsoaffectthewinprobability.
• InstructiondifficultyModelsdonotperformuniformlyoverinstructions: thepreference
ofhumanswillgenerallydependontheinstruction. Forexample,thebaselinemightbe
muchbetterforcodingtasksthananyothertasks. Foreveryinstructionwethuswant
tomodelthedifficultyofthattaskforthebaseline. Notethatthe(baseline)“instruction
difficulty”isnotcausedby“model”butconditioningonitcanenhancetheprecisionof
estimatesinregressionanalysisbyreducingunexplainedvariabilityPearl(2009).
WecanobtainlengthcorrectedAlpacaEvalscoreintwosteps: (i)first,wecanfitamodel
tothesethreeattributes, and(ii)thenwezerooutthe“lengthofoutput”termtoobtain
counterfactualestimatesofAlpacaEvalwinrate.
Specifically, for the first step, we will collect a list of ratings {x,z ,z ,m,b,y} from the
m b
AlpacaEvalleaderboard,andthenfitaregressionmodelq topredictyfromx,z ,z ,m,b.
θ,ϕ,ψ m b
Theregressionmodel. Motivatedbythepreviousdiscussion,wewillmodeltheAlpacaE-
valpredictions f(z ,z ,x)withalogisticregressionthathas3terms: model,length,and
m b
instruction. Wewillfirstpresenttheoverallregressionformula,explainthedetailsofthe
featurization,andthendescribesomenaturallyappealingpropertiesofourfeaturization.
q (y =1|z ,z ,m,b,x) :=
θ,ϕ,ψ m b
(cid:18) (cid:18) len(z )−len(z ) (cid:19) (cid:19)
logistic θ −θ +ϕ ·tanh m b +(ψ −ψ )γ .
m b m,b std(len(z )−len(z )) m b x
m b
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
Model Length Instruction
(1)
Themodelandinstructiontermsarestraightforward—theycanbeviewedasthelog-linear
contributionofthemodel(m,b)andeachinstruction’sdifficulty(γ)onthebaselinewinrate.
4


=== LLMs Are Biased Towards Output Formats! Systematically Evaluating and Mitigating Output Format Bias of LLMs.pdf ===
LLMs Are Biased Towards Output Formats!
Systematically Evaluating and Mitigating Output Format Bias of LLMs
DoXuanLong1,2,HaiNguyenNgoc3,TiviatisSim1,4,HieuDao1,ShafiqJoty5,6,
KenjiKawaguchi1,NancyF.Chen2,Min-YenKan1
1NationalUniversityofSingapore,2InstituteforInfocommResearch(I2R),A*STAR,
3VinAIResearch,4InstituteofHighPerformanceComputing(IHPC),A*STAR,
5SalesforceResearch,6NanyangTechnologicalUniversity
{xuanlong.do,tiviatis}@u.nus.edu,haibeo2552001@gmail.com,
sjoty@salesforce.com,{daohieu,kenji,kanmy}@comp.nus.edu.sg,nfychen@i2r.a-star.edu.sg
Abstract
Prompt: Answer the following question step-by-step. Your final answer is a
character identifier (A or B or C or D).
Wepresentthefirstsystematicevaluationex- Question: How many positive integers are factors of 120 and also factors of 40?
Answer choices: A. 4 | B. 8 | C. 2 | D. 1
aminingformatbiasinperformanceoflarge Correct: B. 8
languagemodels(LLMs). Ourapproachdistin- Format prompt: Format prompt: Format prompt:
Bold the final Italicize the final Filling in the blank:
guishesbetweentwocategoriesofanevalua-
answer. answer. "The answer is [X]."
tionmetricunderformatconstraintstoreliably
andaccuratelyassessperformance: onemea- 1 2 3
suresperformancewhenformatconstraintsare
adhered to, while the other evaluates perfor- 1: Find the prime...the To find the number... To solve this problem...
final answer is B. 8. The correct answer is C. "The answer is [B]."
manceregardlessofconstraintadherence. We
Answer: Evaluation Answer: Evaluation Answer: Evaluation
thendefineametricformeasuringtheformat Format: Format: Format:
biasofLLMsandestablisheffectivestrategies
toreduceit. Subsequently,wepresentourem- Figure1: AMMLUexample(Hendrycksetal.,2021)with
ChatGPT across different formats. In Case (1), the model
pirical format bias evaluation spanning four
can answer the question but fails to bold only the answer,
commonly used categories—multiple-choice
hinderingautomaticevaluation.InCase(2),themodelfollows
question-answer,wrapping,list,andmapping— theformatbutproducesanincorrectresult. InCase(3),the
covering15widely-usedformats. Ourevalua- modelyieldsthecorrectanswerandformat.Theseshowbias
tiononeightgenerationtasksuncoverssignifi- inChatGPT’sperformanceacrossformats.
cantformatbiasacrossstate-of-the-artLLMs.
Wefurtherdiscoverthatimprovingtheformat- Whilemanystudies,includingthoselistedabove,
instruction following capabilities of LLMs have utilized LLMs to output in specific formats,
acrossformatspotentiallyreducesformatbias. understanding their format capabilities is critical
Based on our evaluation findings, we study
yethasreceivedlimitedattention. Recently,Zhou
promptingandfine-tuningwithsynthesizedfor-
etal.(2023)andXiaetal.(2024)introducedbench-
mat data techniques to mitigate format bias.
marksassessingLLMformat-followingproficiency.
Ourmethodssuccessfullyreducethevariance
However, these studies neglect deeper insights
in ChatGPT’s performance among wrapping
formatsfrom235.33to0.71(%2). intohowtheseformatsimpactmodelperformance,
which is the ultimate concern for industrial and
1 Introduction
practical applications. Given numerous formats
To unlock the full potential of automating real- recently introduced across tasks and models, as-
worldapplications,state-of-the-artlargelanguage sessingthisaspectisessentialforbusinessyetchal-
models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery lenging. Evaluation can be ambiguous and often
etal.,2022;OpenAI,2022;Touvronetal.,2023) overlook cases where models provide correct an-
areincreasinglyleveragedtotailoroutputstospe- swersbutareformattedwrong(Case(1)inFig.1).
cific task formats. This powerful approach has Bridgingthesegaps,weconductthefirstsystem-
driven advancements across domains including atic evaluation of the format bias of LLMs. Our
medicine(Thirunavukarasuetal.,2023;Clusmann studyattemptstoanswertheresearchquestions:
etal.,2023),dataanalysis(Chengetal.,2023;Liu
How can we systematically and accurately
et al., 2023), and even evaluating models them-
assess format bias in the performance of
selves(ChiangandLee,2023;Changetal.,2024).
LLMs,andtowhatextentaretheybiased?
EmployingLLMsinsuchapplicationsheavilyde-
pendsonnotonlytheirformat-followingcapability To fairly assess bias in model performance
butalsohigh-qualityresultswithinformats. acrossformats,itiscrucialtoevaluateallscenarios
5202
beF
32
]LC.sc[
2v65680.8042:viXra
depicted in Fig. 1. Nonetheless, Case (1) is chal- codeblocks(Guretal.,2023),andintegratetags,
lengingtoautomaticallymeasure,requiringcostly or LaTeX for scientific texts (Singh et al., 2023;
humaninvestigation. Therefore,weproposeare- Wangetal.,2024). Giventherisingimportanceof
liableestimatorforevaluatingLLMperformance formattingcapabilitiesinLLMs,recently,format-
underformatconstraintswithouthumaninterven- following benchmarks have been developed for
tion by considering format-following scores. We assessing LLMs’ adherence to specified formats
start by redefining LLM evaluation metrics into (Zhou et al., 2023; Xia et al., 2024; Chen et al.,
two distinct classes to construct the estimator, as 2024;Macedoetal.,2024;Liuetal.,2024). How-
detailedin§3.1. Accordingly,wedefineametricto ever,thesestudiesonlyevaluateformat-instruction
quantifyformatbiasinLLMsandestablishcriteria following capabilities. Our research further as-
forevaluatingmethodsthatsuccessfullymitigate sessesLLMperformanceacrossdifferentformats,
thisbias(§3.2). Basedontheseformulations,we uncoveringsignificantformatbiasinvarioustasks
presentourformatevaluationframework,compris- andmodels. Wealsoacknowledgetheconcurrent
ing of the widely-utilized categories of multiple- work by Tam et al. (2024), which examines the
choice question–answer (MCQ; §5.1), wrapping impactofformatrestrictionsonLLMperformance.
(§5.2),list(§5.3)andmappingformats(§5.4). However,unlikeourapproach,theydonotdisen-
Across 15 widely-used formats, our evalua- tangleevaluationmetricsunderformatconstraints
tionwithzero-shotandzero-shotchain-of-thought and only evaluate 3 structured formats, substan-
prompting(Kojimaetal.,2022)oneightquestion- tiallyfewerthanourstudy.
answeringandreasoningtasksrevealssubstantial
performanceandformat-instructionfollowingin- 3 OutputFormatEvaluationFramework
equalities. Toaddressthis,weexamineprompting
3.1 TheoreticalAnalysis: FormatEvaluation
andfine-tuningusingsynthesizedformatdatatech-
niquesthatworkforbothopen-andclosed-source Automatic evaluation of LLMs in question-
LLMs. OurstudyvalidatesthatenhancingLLMs’ answering and reasoning tasks mainly relies on
capabilities to follow format instructions poten- rule-basedextractiontoidentifyfinalanswersfrom
tially mitigates format bias: (1) Prompting with generated texts (Guo et al., 2023). Within for-
demonstrationsand(2)Repeatingformatinstruc- matconstraints,determiningthemodel’strueper-
tions substantially alleviates this bias. Moreover, formance, which is our focus, can be ambiguous
weinvestigate(3)Synthesizinglimitedformatdata andinaccurate,ascorrectresponsesmightbeover-
basedonourevaluationresultsforfine-tuning. Our lookedduetoformatdiscrepancies(e.g.,Case(1)
approaches significantly decrease ChatGPT per- in Fig. 1). To address this, we propose redefin-
formancevarianceacrosswrappingformatsfrom ingtheserule-basedevaluationmetricstoreliably,
235.33to0.71(%2)onMMLU(Hendrycksetal.,
transparentlyandaccuratelymeasuringtheLLM
2021). Ourkeycontributionsare: performancegivenformatsrestrictions.
1. Weintroducethefirstsystematicframework1 Notations. Supposethatweareinterestedineval-
toevaluateformatperformancebiasinLLMs. uatinganLLMMonataskT usinganevaluation
metricE (suchas“Accuracy”)underaformatcon-
2. Alarge-scaleevaluationspanning15formats,
straintsC (suchas“Boldthefinalanswer.”) onn
8 tasks, and 4 models revealing substantial
sampleswiththeground-truthanswers{y ,...,y }
1 n
LLMperformancevarianceacrossformats.
and raw generated answers {yˆ ,...,yˆ }, where
1 n
y ,yˆ ∈ Y ∀i with Y being the answer token se-
3. The development of 3 novel prompting and i i
quencespace. WedenoteF asthebinaryformat-
fine-tuningmethodstomitigatethisbias. C
followingevaluationfunctionofC:
2 RelatedWorks
(cid:40)
1, ifyˆ satisfiesC.
Large language models (LLMs) have shown re- F (yˆ) = i (1)
C i
0, otherwise.
markableproficiencyinformattingoutputstomeet
humanexpectations. Suchformatsincludemark-
FromEq.(1),wedefinetheFormatInstruction-
downforlistsandpointers(Achiametal.,2023),
following(FI)Score,denotedasFI ,astheper-
C
1Ourcodesanddatawillbemadepubliclyavailableatlink. centageofgeneratedoutputssatsisfyingC:
potential errors. Another alternative is to assign
(cid:80)n
F (yˆ)
FI = i=1 C i ·100 (2) a default value to Ext C (yˆ i ). While this can tem-
C
n porarilyavoidcasesMfailstofulfillC,thisisan
Prior studies extensively focus on evaluating incorrectpracticesincethedefaultvaluemaynot
FI C (Zhou et al., 2023; Xia et al., 2024). Our bethe actualoutput. Reliably measuringTrueE
work further targets evaluating the performance oftenrequireshumaninvestigation(Linetal.,2022)
ofLLMsgiventheformatconstraintsC. Under orthefine-tuningofevaluationmodelsasscorers
C,wedenoteExt C ()astherule-basedanswerex- (Yangetal.,2024),bothofwhicharecostly.
tractor (or a mixture of extractors) to extract the Nevertheless,TrueE iscrucialforafairevalu-
finalanswerfromyˆ i forcomparingitwithy i . We ation of LLM performance bias across formats.
define: twoevaluationscoresbasedonE: Therefore, we propose a simple estimator of
Definition 3.1 (Systematic Evaluation Score TrueE,denotedasEstTrueE:
(SysE)).
(cid:40)
1 (cid:88) n EstTrueE =
SysE.
F
10
IC
0 , ifFI
C
̸= 0.
(5)
SysE = (E(y i ,Ext C (yˆ i )).F C (yˆ i )) (3) 0, otherwise.
n
i=1
When FI = 0, estimating EstTrueE be-
C
Essentially,SysE quantifiestheperformanceof
comes impossible. EstTrueE enables the fair
MontaskT basedonthegeneratedanswersthat
formatbiasevaluationbecausenormalizingSysE
meet the format constraints C. For example, in
byFI preventsskewingcomparisonsofhowdif-
C
Fig. 1, Case (1) yields a SysE score of 0, while
ferent formats affect the LLM due to FI . It is
C
Case (3) achieves 1. This also shows that SysE
especiallyusefulforlarge-scaleexperimentssince
maynotaccuratelyreflecttheactualperformance
it is fully automatic. Let the EstTrueE margin
ofMonT,becauseExt ()mayfailtoextractthe
C oferrorbeϵwithaconfidenceinterval1−αand
finalanswersfrom(correct)answersdissatisfying
S = n·FI as#generatedanswerssatisfyingC.
C C
C (e.g., Case (1) in Fig. 1). We define the True
Theorem 3.1 (Reliability of EstTrueE).
EvaluationScoretoaddressthis. Assumethatwe
EstTrueE is consistent. Moreover, EstTrueE
haveanoracleextractorfunctionOracExt ()that
C isreliableifandonlyif:
canextractthefinalanswerfromyˆ,regardlessof
i
whetheryˆ fulfillsC,wehave: 1
i FI ≥ (6)
Definition3.2(TrueEvaluationScore(TrueE)). C 1+n· (cid:0) ϵ (cid:1)2
v·s
Moreover,wehave:
n
1 (cid:88)
TrueE = E(y ,OracExt (yˆ)) (4)
i C i
n
i=1 lim EstTrueE = TrueE (7)
TrueE measurestheperformanceofMontask
FIC→100
T across all generated answers given the format where s2 is the sample variance of evaluation
constraints C, regardless of format satisfaction. scores of generated answers satisfying C and
In Fig. 1, both Cases (1) and (3) achieve a true v = t is the critical value from the t-
α/2,SC−1
accuracy of 1. This score is crucial for assessing distributionwithS −1degreesoffreedom.
C
thetrueperformanceofLLMsgiventheformat. Insummary,wehaveproposedaconsistentes-
Priorstudiesdonotclearlydifferentiatebetween timator EstTrueE of the true performance of
SysE andTrueE. Inpractice,measuringTrueE LLMs measured by metric E under the format
ischallengingbecauseOracExt ()isunavailable. constraints (Def. 3.2). This estimator is essential
C
While researchers typically employ a mixture of because it: (1) ensures transparent and fair LLM
methodstoextractanswers,thisapproachencoun- performance evaluation across different formats;
ters two severe issues. First, these mixture-of- and(2)supportslarge-scaleformatbiasevaluation.
methodextractorscanbecomplex,unreliable,and NotethatahighscoreEstTrueE isonlyreliable
oftenimpracticalforlarge-scaleexperimentswith iffFI ishighenough(Thm. 3.1). Henceforth,un-
C
diverseformatslikeours. Second,designingthem lessotherwisespecified,EstTrueEisourprimary
to be reliable for complex formats such as medi- metricformeasuringmodelperformancegivenfor-
calreportscanbeimpossibleduetothecountless matconstraints. TheproofofThm. 3.1isin§B.1.
3.2 TheoreticalAnalysis: FormatBias (iii) List (§5.3). where the output of LLMs is
a list of elements. We investigate 4 formats rep-
Thissectiondefinesthemetrictoquantifyformat
resenting lists: (1) Python list (Do et al., 2025);
biasandoutlinesthecriteriatomitigatesuchbias.
(2) Bullet-point list (Liu et al., 2024); (3) List
Bias measurement. To measure the for- of elements separated by a special character
mat bias of the LLM M across k for- “[SEP]”(Boucher,2023);and(4)Listofelements
mats F o = {C 1 ,...,C k }, we define a arrangedonseparatelines(Mishra,2023).
single metric, BiasF , as the variance of
o
(iv)Mapping(§5.4). whereLLMsareemployed
EstTrueE scores over these k formats, de-
to output dictionaries or maps. We focus on
noted as {EstTrueE ,...,EstTrueE }. Let
1 k
µ = 1 (cid:80)k EstTrueE represent the two ubiquitously used mapping structures: (1)
EstTrueE k i=1 i
Pythondictionary/JSON(JavaScriptObjectNo-
meanEstTrueE score. Then:
tation)(Baumannetal.,2024)and(2)YAML(Yet
AnotherMarkupLanguage)(Goeletal.,2023).
k
1 (cid:88)
BiasF = (EstTrueE −µ )2
o i EstTrueE Format-instruction following. We introduce
k
i=1 Appx.-Alg. 1, a rule-based heuristic to deter-
(8)
minetheformat-instructionfollowingfunctionF
C
Realiability of BiasF o . By Eq. (8), the lower (Eq.(1))forourbenchmarkedformats. Itcalculates
BiasF o is, the less format-F o -biased M is, sug- thebinaryFIscorebyverifyingthatthegenerated
gestingacriterionformitigatingoutputformatbias. outputincludesthespecifiedformattingtokensand
However,BiasF o isanestimatorbasedonthees- thattheextractedfinalanswermatchestheexpected
timators EstTrueE i . Therefore, to enhance the type. Itishighlyextendabletootherformats(§A).
reliability of BiasF , it is also necessary to im-
o
4 GeneralExperimentalSetups
provethereliabilityofEstTrueE byincreasing
i
FI ∀i (Thm. 3.1). Therefore, we propose two
Ci Benchmarks. ForMCQbiasevaluation(§5.1),
necessarycriteriaforaneffectivemethodtomit-
weselecttwodatasets: MMLU(Hendrycksetal.,
igate format bias in LLMs: (i) Minimize bias
2021)andBBH(Suzgunetal.,2023). ForMMLU,
metric: reducingBiasF ,indicatinglessformat-
o werandomlychoose27subcategories. ForBBH,
F o -biasinM;(ii)Increasetheformat-following we select the sports_understanding category
scoresforallformats: ensuringthereliabilityof
followingGuptaetal.(2024). Forwrappingbias
BiasF byincreasingtheFI scoresacrossallthe
o assessment(§5.2),inadditiontoMCQbenchmarks,
formats: {FI ,...,FI }(Eq.(2)).
C1 C k thefollowingdatasetsareexperimented: GSM8K
(Cobbe et al., 2021) for reasoning, FairytaleQA
3.3 FormatsforEvaluation
(Xuetal.,2022)fornarrativecomprehension,and
Weestablish4formatcategoriesforevaluationcon-
HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018) for multi-hop rea-
sistingof15formatsintroducedbypriorpractices:
soning. For list bias investigation (§5.3), we use
(i) Multiple-choice question (MCQ) answer SciDocsRR(Muennighoffetal.,2023),ascientific
(§5.1). whereLLMsanswerquestionsbyselect- documentrankingtaskastheorderlistgeneration
ing from provided choices, presented as either a task,andSemEval2017(Augensteinetal.,2017),
(1)Characteridentifier(RobinsonandWingate, thekeyphraseextractiontaskastheunorderedlist
2023);or(2)Choicevalue(Chenetal.,2023). generation. Formappingbiasexamination(§5.4),
weutilizeadocument-levelinformationextraction
(ii)Wrapping(§5.2). whereLLMsmustenclose
tasknamedSciREX(Jainetal.,2020)bysynthe-
thefinalanswerwithinthetwocharacters,which
sizing three extraction difficulty levels: easy (ex-
is crucial for automatic evaluation to isolate the
tractingfrom1sentencefor1category),medium
finalanswerfromreasoningthoughts. Wefocuson
(3sentences,2categories),andhard(5sentences,
evaluating7widelyusedwrappingstrategies: (1)
4categories). ForallbenchmarksexceptMCQ,we
Specialcharacter(Guretal.,2023);(2)Bolding
sample200pointsforevaluation(Baietal.,2024).
(Zhou et al., 2023); (3) Italicizing (Zhou et al.,
2023);(4)Doublebrackets(Luoetal.,2024);(5) Models. Weselectbothopen-andclosed-source
Doubleparentheses;(6)Placeholder(Wangetal., LLMs for our evaluation: Gemma-7B-it (Team
2024);(7)Quoting(Zhouetal.,2023). et al., 2024), Mistral-7B-it-v0.2 (Jiang et al.,


=== Loose lips sink ships Mitigating Length Bias in Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback.pdf ===
Loose lips sink ships: Mitigating Length Bias
in Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
WeiShen1∗, RuiZheng1∗, WenyuZhan1, JunZhao1, ShihanDou1,
TaoGui3†, QiZhang1, XuanjingHuang1,2†
1 SchoolofComputerScience,FudanUniversity
2 InternationalHumanPhenomeInstitutes(Shanghai),Shanghai,China
3 InstituteofModernLanguagesandLinguistics,FudanUniversity
wshen21@m.fudan.edu.cn,
{ruizheng20,tgui,xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract
[Human]: What does the phrase "a stitch in time saves
nine"mean?
Reinforcementlearningfromhumanfeedback [Assistant]:It’sacommonphraseinEnglishthatmeans "
anearlysolutiontoaproblemsavesalotofeffortinthe
serves as a crucial bridge, aligning large
longrun".
language models with human and societal [Human]:Canyouapplythissayingin a sentence?
values.Thisalignmentrequiresavastcorpusof
SFT model
humanfeedbacktolearnarewardmodel,which
[Assistant]: Sure, here's an example sentence: "My
is subsequently used to finetune language brotheralwayssaysthatastitchintimesavesnine,sohe
models. However,wehaveidentifiedthatthe neverprocrastinatesonfixingthings."
reward model often finds shortcuts to bypass
Vanilla RM + PPO
itsintendedobjectives,misleadinglyassuming [Assistant]:Sure,here'sanexample:"Ialwaysmakesure
that humans prefer longer responses. The tofixanysmallissuesinmycarstraightawayratherthan
waitingforthemtobecomebiggerproblems.A stitch in
emergence of length bias often induces the
time saves nine, they say!"
model to favor longer outputs, yet it doesn’t
equate to an increase in helpful information Ours + PPO
[Assistant]:Yes,here‘sanexampleofhowyoucanapply
withintheseoutputs. Inthispaper,wepropose
thissayinginasentence:“Fixingthatleakinthepiperight
an innovative solution, applying the Product- awayisastitchintimesavesnine."
of-Experts(PoE)techniquetoseparatereward
modelingfromtheinfluenceofsequencelength. Figure 1: Comparison of model outputs using SFT,
Inourframework,themainexpertconcentrates VanillaRMwithPPO,andOurMethodwithPPO.Our
on understanding human intents, while the studydemonstratesthatthecurrentrewardmodeltends
biased expert targets the identification and toincentivizethemodeltogeneratelongerresponses,
captureoflengthbias. Tofurtherenhancethe disregardingthetruehumanintent. Thisphenomenon
learning of bias, we introduce perturbations ishighlightedintheexampleshown,whereweobserve
intothebias-focusedexpert,disruptingtheflow adeclineinmodelperformance.
ofsemanticinformation. Experimentalresults
validate the effectiveness of our approach,
indicating that language model performance
Human Feedback (RLHF) techniques (Ouyang
isimproved,irrespectiveofsequencelength.
etal.,2022;Baietal.,2022a). Thiscombination
enables these models to not only learn how
1 Introduction
to follow human instructions but also better
In recent years, the field of natural language understand human intent and align with human
processing has witnessed remarkable advance- and societal values. Undoubtedly, RLHF plays a
ments with the emergence of powerful models pivotalroleinthesuccessofthesemodels.
like InstructGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022), GPT-4
One of the key components of RLHF is re-
(OpenAI, 2023), Claude (Bai et al., 2022b), and
ward modeling (RM), which involves learning
others. These models have displayed remarkable
a reward function from human preferences or
proficiency in understanding human queries and
demonstrations. This allows an RL agent to
providing helpful responses. Their success can
optimize its behavior based on the feedback
be attributed to a two-step learning process that
receivedfromrewardmodel(Ziegleretal.,2019b).
involvesSupervisedFine-Tuning(SFT)followed
However, the process is not without challenges.
bytheutilizationofReinforcementLearningfrom
Human preference data can be noisy and subject
∗Equalcontribution. to inconsistencies among different annotators,
†Correspondingauthor. leading to suboptimal results (Bai et al., 2022a).
3202
voN
92
]LC.sc[
5v99150.0132:viXra
For example, reward gaming, a well-known and 2 RelatedWork
pervasive issue, refers to the phenomenon where
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feed-
trained models exhibit undesirable patterns and
back. Using human preference feedback is a
generatelow-qualityoutputswhilestillreceiving
popularwayforrealizingAIalignment(Leikeetal.,
highrewards(Skalseetal.,2022;Panetal.,2022).
2018). Preferences are often provide numerical
Thesecomplexitiesemphasizetheneedforcareful
value or demonstrations (WirthChristian et al.,
considerationandrobustmethodstoensurereliable
2017)withoutrequiringexpertproficiencyorfine-
andmeaningfulrewardfunctionsinRLHF.
grained feedback . Alignment bring a potent
AsshowninFigure1,asimilarrewardgaming
capabilitytostate-of–the-artgenerativefoundation
issue arises in NLP reward modeling. We have
models, like InstructGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022),
observed that the reward model tends to reply
Sparrow (Glaese et al., 2022), Claude (Bai et al.,
on simple patterns, such as sentence length, to
2022b), which means this method is of great
differentiate between good and bad responses.
success in the paradigm of learning with human
Typically, the reward model assumes that longer
feedback. Some prior work have explored using
responses are better, which hinders its ability
humanfeedbacktoimprovevarioustasks,suchas
to learn the true human intent and preference.
summarization(Stiennonetal.,2022;Ziegleretal.,
Addressingthisproblemiscrucialforimproving
2019b), dialogue (Bai et al., 2022a), translation
the effectiveness of NLP reward modeling and
(Bahdanau et al., 2016), event generation (Zhou
capturingthetruenuancesofhumanlanguage.
and Xu, 2020), semantic parsing (Lawrence and
Inthispaper,weproposeaProduct-of-Experts
Riezler,2019)andinstructionfollowing(Ouyang
(PoE)-basedmethod(Hinton,2002)thatconsists
et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a). These work can
oftwoexpertmodelstodecouplehumanintentand
be categoried as supervised fine-tuing or reward
responselengthduringtherewardmodelingphase.
modelingonwell-constructedhumanannotations
The first expert operates similarly to a standard
information,thelatterisalsoknownasavitalphase
reward model and focuses on learning the true
in RL from human feedback (Christiano et al.,
humanintentbehindresponses. Thesecondexpert,
2023; MacGlashan et al., 2017). Our work falls
referred toas thebias-only expert, isdesigned to
withintherealmofRLHFandaimstoawakenLM
learn simple patterns, specifically the length of
withbothharmlessandhelpfulabilities.
responses. It employs a smaller model capacity
Reward Hacking. Goodhart’s Law1 (Strathern,
andalargerlearningratetocapturecoarse-grained
1997) can be formulated a tough challenge in
information of inputs. Additionally, stochastic
numerous fields. A few approaches have been
perturbations are introduced into the inputs of
proposedforreducingoveroptimizationingeneral
the bias-only expert, intentionally disrupting the
reinforcement learning (Everitt et al., 2017), as
semantic information present in the input. To
wellasinrewardmodels(GleaveandIrving,2022).
summarize, the main contributions of our work
The overoptimization problem of reward model
arefollowings:
can generally regard as a special case of reward
• We identify that reward modeling in NLP gaming, also known as reward hacking (Skalse
tends to rely on length bias, hindering the etal.,2022). Inaddition,Panetal.(2022)proposed
modelsfromaccuratelylearningtruehuman tosystematicallyanalyzerewardmisspecification
intentandevenleadingtomodeldegradation. in RL by creating a set of domains where the
agent optimizes a hand-engineered proxy reward
• We propose a simple and efficient solution
function. In this study, we consider the length
leveraging PoE technique. Our method
ofhumanpreferencesasaconfoundingfactorthat
effectivelydecoupleslengthbiasfromhuman
hinderstherewardmodelfromaccuratelyassessing
intent,enablingmodelstobettercaptureand
thequalityofmodelresponsesbasedontruehuman
understandhumanpreferences.
intent.
Products-of-Experts. Products-of-Experts(PoE)
• Wevalidatetheeffectivenessofourproposed
(Hinton,2002)hasbeenproposedasanalternative
method. Theresultsshowthatourapproach
to mixture model to compensate for their poor
enhances the learning of human intent by
avoiding the generation of meaningless and
1Goodhart’s law is an adage often stated as, When a
overlyverboseoutputs. measurebecomesatarget,itceasestobeagoodmeasure
efficiency in high dimensional space. This feedback through the launch of a learned reward
techniqueisoftenbasedontheprincipleofwisdom function. Tothisend,wemaximizethefollowing
ofcrowds,whichsuggeststhataggregatingmultiple objectivefunctioninRLtraining:
modelscanleadtobetterperformancethanrelying
on a single model. Clark et al. (2019) firstly use E (cid:104) r (x,y)−βlog (cid:16) πRL(y|x)/πSFT(y|x) (cid:17)(cid:105) ,
(x,y)∼D θ ϕ
PoEtobuildaparadigmthattrainadebiasedmodel
ensemble with a bias-only model. The goal is to β is a parameter to control the deviation from
encouragethedebiasedmodeltoutilizeorthogonal the SFT model πSFT. The language model
information with information from the bias-only policy π ϕ is initialized to πSFT. Importantly,
model. Typically,thiskindofmethod(Clarketal., the last per-token KL-penalty term is used to
2019;Heetal.,2019)usuallycontainstwostages. preventthemodelfromdeviatingtoofarfromthe
In this work, we adopt the end-to-end manner deviatingexceedingtheappropriatescopefromthe
like(KarimiMahabadietal.,2020)whichjointly distributiononwhichtherewardmodelisaccurate,
learn the bias-only model and the debiased main aswellasmaintainingthegenerationdiversityand
modelsimultaneously,therefore,ourrewardmodel preventing mode-collapse to single high-reward
can take advantage of PoE to use a weak learner answers(Ziegleretal.,2019b).
to capture the length shortcuts without any prior
4 LengthBiasinRewardModel
informationaboutthelengthofsentences,andthe
mainmodelcanpurelyattainthecorrectknowledge In this section, we present the phenomenon of
thatissuitableforhumanpreference. length bias in reward models and utilize causal
analysis to examine the underlying reasons for
3 Preliminary
thisoccurrence. Weshedlightonwhythereward
model exhibits a preference for longer sentences
For the purpose of implement RLHF, we follow
anddelveintothecausalfactorscontributingtothis
thepipelineinZiegleretal.(2019a). Itisusually
bias.
madeupofthreephrases: 1)supervisedfine-tuning,
2) reward modeling, 3) reinforcement-learning
4.1 LengthBiasPhenomenon
optimization,ourattentionisdirectedtowardsthe
We present a Figure 2 depicting the scores and
lasttwophases.
lengthsof4000SFTmodeloutputresults,which
SFT: It begins with a generic pre-trained LM,
were evaluated using the vanilla reward model
which is fine-tuned using supervised learning on
trained on the helpful and harmless (HH) dataset
a high-quality instruction dataset. This allows
(Bai et al., 2022b). It is evident that there is
themodeltofollowvariousinstructions,perform
a strong correlation between the reward scores
dialogue and dialogue. As a result, we obtain an
LMπSFT duringthisphase. and lengths. When the model generates longer
sequences,therewardmodeltendstoassignhigher
Reward Modeling: According to the Bradley-
scores. Thiscorrelationcontradictshumanintent
Terry model (Bradley and Terry, 1952), areward
since the helpfulness and harmlessness of the
functionishardtodescribeandneedstobelearned
outputshouldnotbesolelydeterminedbyitslength.
frompreferencesamongtrajectories. Thereward
MorefigurescanbeseenintheAppendix8.
model r is trained on human preference dataset
θ
In addition, the length bias locates in PPO as
to predict which response y ∈ {0,1} is better as
well, we additionally investigate it on TL;DR
judgedbyhuman,givenaqueryx. Iftheresponse
(Stiennonetal.,2022)intheAppendixA.4
preferred by human is y , the RM loss can be
i
expressedas:
4.2 ConfoundingFactor
−E [log(σ(r (x,y )−r (x,y )))], (1) As Figure 3 depicted, we formulate the problem
(x,y)∼D θ i θ 1−i
as a causal structure (Zeng et al., 2023; Tien
where r (x,y) is the scalar output of the reward etal.,2023)ofpreference-basedrewardmodeling.
θ
modelforqueryxandresponsey withparameters Pairwise preference information are conveyed
θ,andD isthehumanpreferencedataset. basedonanobservedrewardfunctionr. Features
RL Optimization: Then we fine-tune the SFT (x,y) are causal factors can affect r and another
modelonourenvironmentusingPPO(Schulman nuisance features z regarded as a potential con-
etal.,2017). Thelanguagemodelisprovidedwith founder factor that have impact on r. Note that
(a) VanillaRM (b) Mainrewardexpert(Ours)
Figure 2: Distributionsof Rewardvs. log-scaledLength in vanilla RMand ourproposed method. The results
illustratethatVanillaRMtendstoassignhigherrewardstolongerresponses,whereasourproposedmethodachieves
amoreuniformdistributionofrewardsacrossdifferentresponselengths.
arrow. Furthermore, unobserved human bias and
noiseinducedbyannotators,suchasinappropriate
judgments on certain individuals, groups, races,
sexes,etc.,denotedbyη,alsoaffectthepreference
labels.
As a consequence, the learned reward rˆ has
risktoachieveactuallylowyetevennear-perfect
performance on a held-out test dataset with
followingtwofactors: 1)causalfactorandnuisance
factorcanbecorrelatedbythecon-founderfactor
(x,y),2)RMeasilyfindashortcutexistsbetween
Figure3: Causalstructureofpreference-basedreward
modeling. Lengthbias,representedasaconfounding causalfactorandrewardfunctioninthedistribution
factorz,influencesthemodel’slearningoftruehuman of test set and can not be extrapolated to out-of-
preferences(x,y). domaindataset. Thismightbereflectedwhenthis
misspecificatedrewardmodelrˆ(x,y,z)guidethe
LMagenttoalignwithhumanintentionusingPPO,
z mightbecorrelatedwith(x,y),potentiallydue
asaresultofdistributiondrift.
totheirsharingofthesamecausalparentorthere
beingbiasesduringdatacollection,likeannotators
4.3 Challenges
are inclined to favor longer sentences, which is
expected. The spurious correlation between reward scalars
In the presence of confounding effects, the and response lengths can be problematic, as
goal of preference-based reward modeling is to it may result in biased or sub-optimal model
learnabiasedrewardfunctionrˆ(x,y,z)thatbest behavior. However,duetotheunobservednature
matches the stated preferences. There are state of this spurious attribute when performing a
features (x,y) that are causal with respect to traditionalERM-basedtrainingparadigm,itcanbe
the true human intent but are unobserved by the challenging to investigate and address during the
learningagentandconsiderednon-robustfeatures rewardmodelingstage. Inspiredbythedebiasing
effortlesslylearned. Inourcase,wesupposethat frameworkofensemblemodelmethods,weposit
length bias is one vital element strongly related thatlengthbiascanbealleviatedthrougharobust
to (x,y). Actually, this situation can hardly be learning approach, which involves disentangling
completelyavoided,andourmotivationistoreduce the underlying features and feeding them into
the probability of the path directed by the blue distinct experts. This assumption is grounded


=== Mitigating Length Bias in RLHF through a Causal Lens.pdf ===
Mitigating Length Bias in RLHF through a Causal Lens
HyeonjiKim1,SujeongOh1,SanghackLee1*
1GraduateSchoolofDataScience,SeoulNationalUniversity
Abstract suchpreferencesareimplicitlyencodedintorewardmodels,
RLHF-trainedLLMstendtoprioritizeverbosityoverclarity,
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) is
oftenresultinginunnecessarilylongandlesseffectiveoutputs
widelyusedtoalignlargelanguagemodels(LLMs)withhu-
that may degrade user experience. This phenomenon may
manpreferences.However,RLHF-trainedrewardmodelsof-
arisebecauserewardmodelsleveragespuriouscorrelationsin
tenexhibitlengthbias—asystematictendencytofavorlonger
datathatfailtocapturethetruequalityoftheoutput(Stiennon
responsesbyconflatingverbositywithquality.Weproposea
causalframeworkforanalyzingandmitigatinglengthbiasin etal.2020;Singhaletal.2024;Huangetal.2024).
RLHFrewardmodeling.Centraltoourapproachisacoun- Several methods have been proposed to mitigate length
terfactualdataaugmentationmethodthatgeneratesresponse bias. For instance, Chen et al. (2024); Wang et al. (2025)
pairsdesignedtoisolatecontentqualityfromverbosity.These operate on learned representations by regularizing the re-
counterfactual examples are then used to train the reward wardmodel,andLiuetal.(2025);Caietal.(2025)generate
model,enablingittoassessresponsesbasedoncontentqual- randomized or loosely controlled response pairs to reduce
ityindependentlyofverbosity.Specifically,weconstruct(1)
sensitivitytolength.However,theseapproachesoftenlack
length-divergentpairswithsimilarcontentand(2)content-
theabilitytoexplicitlydisentangleverbosityfromsemantic
divergentpairsofsimilarlength.Empiricalevaluationsshow
quality,stillleavingtherewardmodelvulnerabletospurious
thatourmethodreduceslengthbiasinrewardassignmentand
correlationsbetweenresponselengthandthereward.
leadstomoreconcise,content-focusedoutputsfromthepolicy
model.Thesefindingsdemonstratethattheproposedapproach To guide the reward model toward learning preferences
effectivelyreduceslengthbiasandimprovestherobustness basedoncontentqualityratherthansurfacelengthfeatures,
andcontentsensitivityofrewardmodelinginRLHFpipelines. weadoptacausalperspectiveonlengthbias.Withoutsuch
aframework,itisdifficulttoseparategenuineeffectsfrom
misleadingpatterns.Forexample,althoughthereisastrong
1 Introduction
correlation between a country’s per capita chocolate con-
Largelanguagemodels(LLMs)havedemonstratedremark- sumptionanditsnumberofNobellaureates,bothareinflu-
able performance across a wide range of natural language encedbyathirdfactorsuchasnationalwealth.Thisclassic
tasks (Brown et al. 2020; Liang et al. 2023; Chowdhery examplehighlightstheriskofrelyingsolelyonobservational
etal.2023).Reinforcementlearningfromhumanfeedback correlationswithoutcausalreasoning.
(RLHF) (Ziegler et al. 2019; Stiennon et al. 2020) has be- Toaddressthis,weproposeacounterfactualdataaugmen-
come the dominant approach for aligning LLM behavior tationframeworkthatenablesrewardmodelstodisentangle
with human preferences (Ouyang et al. 2022). Despite its contentqualityfromresponselength.Whilecounterfactual
success,RLHFofteninheritsandamplifiessystematicbiases data augmentation has been used to mitigate spurious cor-
inherentlypresentinhumanpreferencedata,withlengthbias relationsinclassificationtasks(Kaushik,Hovy,andLipton
beingoneofthemostpersistentissues(Ouyangetal.2022; 2019),ourworkextendsthiscausalideatotheRLHFreward-
Shen et al. 2023; Saito et al. 2023). Length bias refers to modelingbyasking:“Howwouldtherewardchangeifthe
the tendency of reward models to assign higher scores to samecontentwereexpressedmoreconcisely?”Toanswer
longerresponses,evenwheninformativenessandrelevance this,wegeneratetwotypesofcounterfactualpreferencepairs:
arecomparableorworse.Thisbiascansignificantlydistort (1) semantically equivalent responses of different lengths,
modelbehavioranduserexperience(Singhaletal.2024). and(2)semanticallydifferentresponsesofsimilarlengths.
Recent studies have empirically demonstrated that both Thesecomparisonsisolatetheeffectsofcontentandverbosity,
models and human annotators are susceptible to verbosity guidingtherewardmodeltodeveloppreferencesbasedon
bias (Saito et al. 2023; Shen et al. 2023), often preferring semanticqualityratherthanlength.Ourcontributionsare:
longerresponsesevenwhencontentisheldconstant.When
• We identify a key limitation of existing approaches to
mitigatinglengthbias:theirlimitedabilitytodisentangle
*Correspondingauthor.
Copyright©2026,AssociationfortheAdvancementofArtificial verbosityfromsemanticqualityduetorelianceonspuri-
Intelligence(www.aaai.org).Allrightsreserved. ouscorrelation.Ouranalysisshowsthat,withoutexplicit
5202
voN
61
]LC.sc[
1v37521.1152:viXra
interventions, current methods often conflate response C
lengthwithinformativeness.
X T R X T R
• We propose a novel counterfactual data augmentation
L
frameworkwhichenablesrewardmodelstogeneratere-
(a)Original (b)Ours
wardsbyseparatingcontentqualityfromresponselength.
Trainingoncarefullyconstructedresponsepairsthatiso-
Figure 1: Comparison of original perspective and our per-
lateonefactoratatime,ourmethodfacilitatescontent-
spectiveonrewardmodelingprocess.
basedpreferencelearningduringrewardmodeltraining.
• Weempiricallydemonstratethatourapproacheffectively
mitigates length bias and leads to more robust content-
Structure of Reward Model Common perspectives on
sensitiverewardmodelinginLLM,asevidencedbycom-
rewardmodelingcanberepresentedbythecausalstructure
prehensiveevaluationsacrossmultiplebenchmarks.
inFig.1(a),wherearesponseT isgeneratedfromaprompt
X andthenpassedtoarewardmodelwhichoutputsascore
2 Preliminaries
R.Whilethediagramshowsasingleresponseforsimplicity,
LengthBiasinRewardModel ReinforcementLearning RLHF training is conducted on pairwise preference data,
fromHumanFeedback(RLHF)(Ouyangetal.2022)aligns applyingthisstructuretobothresponsesinacomparison.1
languagemodelswithhumanpreferencesviafine-tuningon Crucially,however,therewardsignalRisnotdirectlysu-
pairwisecomparisons.CommonapproachesincludeProxi- pervisedfromtheenvironment.Althoughtherewardmodel
malPolicyOptimization(PPO)(Schulmanetal.2017),which outputsascalarvalue,thisvalueisnotgroundedinexplicit
usesalearnedrewardmodel,andDirectPreferenceOptimiza- feedbacksignals(asintraditionalRL),butisinsteadinferred
tion(DPO)(Rafailovetal.2023),whichdirectlyoptimizes frombinarypreferencelabelsoverresponsepairs,eitheran-
preferenceswithoutanexplicitrewardmodel.SeeSec.Afor notatedbyhumansorprovidedbyautomatedjudges.Asa
furtherRLHFdetails. result,therewardmodelistrainedviacomparativesupervi-
Several methods have been proposed to mitigate length sion:itlearnstoassignhigherscorestopreferredresponses
biasinrewardmodeling,primarilythrougharchitecturalor within triplets of the form (X,T ,T ). Over time,
chosen rejected
training-timeinterventions.ODIN(Chenetal.2024)usesa thisprocessencouragesthemodeltoapproximateareward
dual-headrewardmodeltoisolatesemanticandstylisticfea- functionthatalignswithobservedpreferences.
tures,whileRRM(Liuetal.2025)augmentspreferencedata
withlengthperturbationstopromoterobustness.Although 3 CausalInterpretationofLengthBias
bothreducesurface-levelsensitivitytoresponselength,they
LengthBiasasaCausalProblem Lengthbiasrefersto
donotperformcontrolledinterventionsonlengthitself,and
thetendencytoassignhigherscorestolongerresponses,even
maysuppressstylisticvariancewithouttrulydisentangling
whentheyarenomoreinformativethanshorterones.This
verbosityfromcontentquality.Thismotivatesourapproach
phenomenonfrequentlyarisesduringRLHFrewardmodel
ofcounterfactualdataaugmentation,whichdisentanglesthe
trainingduetotheentanglementbetweensemanticcontent
effectofcontentandlengthonrewardinaprincipledmanner.
andresponselength,makingitdifficultfortherewardmodel
Pearl’sCausalHierarchy ThePearl’sCausalHierarchy todeterminewhetheritspreferencestemsfromcontentor
(PCH)(Bareinboimetal.2020;PearlandMackenzie2018) lengthandleadingittotreatverbosityasadominantreward
organizes causal reasoning into three hierarchical levels— signal.Fromacausalperspective,thiscanbeillustratedby
associational,interventional,andcounterfactual—eachcor- thestructureinFig.1(b),whereeachresponseT isgenerated
respondingtoadistincttypeofquestiononecanposeabout from two factors: latent semantic content C and response
the world. These levels align with fundamental modes of length L. These two factors may interact, affecting each
reasoning:observing,acting,andimagining.Thefirstlevel, other,asresponsesareshapedbothbywhatissaidandhow
association,isbasedonstatisticalcorrelationsobservedin extensivelyitisconveyed.
data, typically expressed as conditional probabilities such
MotivationforCounterfactuals Sincecontentandlength
asP(y x);forexample,onemayask:“Howdoesbeliefin
| often co-vary in natural data, conventional observational
adiseasechangewhenaparticularsymptomisobserved?”
comparisons—such as randomly sampled response pairs
Thesecondlevel,intervention,concernstheeffectsofactions
fromRLHFdatasets—areinsufficienttoisolatethecausal
ormanipulations,oftenrepresentedasP(y do(x))orP(y ),
| x effectoflengthonreward.Toaddressthis,weintroducea
addressingquestionssuchas:“Willtheheadachesubsideif
counterfactualdataaugmentationstrategy,whichgenerates
thepatientisgiventhedrug?”Thethirdlevel,counterfactual,
syntheticresponsepairstoanswerquestionsthatnaturaldata
involvesreasoningaboutalternateoutcomesunderhypotheti-
cannotsupport,suchas:“Whatwouldtherewardhavebeen
calscenarios.SuchquestionsareformulatedasP(y x′,y′),
x | iftheresponselengthhadbeendifferent?”
asking,forinstance:“Ifthepatienthadtakenthedrugand
Fig. 2 illustrates the need for counterfactual data aug-
theheadachedisappeared,wouldtheheadachestillhaveper-
mentation geometrically. Natural responses lie on a low-
sistedhadtheynottakenthedrug?”Thishierarchyhighlights
thathigher-levelcausalreasoningrequiresstrongerassump- 1Thefinalpreferencecomparisonbetweenrewardscoresisomit-
tionsandrichermodelstosupportcounterfactualinference. tedinthefiguretofocusonthecausalpathwaysfromtheprompt
SeeSec.Bforadditionalexamplesandformalizations. XtoeachresponseT.
length
tnetnoc
through the response; (2) It is feasible to generate alterna-
r m es a p n o if n o s ld e tiveresponsesthatmodifyonefactor(e.g.,verbosity)while
preservingtheother(e.g.,semanticcontent),enablingcon-
P
1
observational
edit t
m
is
ro
a
a
l
t
s
l
e
e
s
l
d
u
y
m
i
t
n
h
e
t
e
d
er
s
t
v
a
o
e
m
n
re
e
ti
fl
o
l
e
e
n
c
n
s
t
g
;
d
t
(
h
i
3
f
,
)
fe
a
W
r
n
e
y
h
n
e
d
c
n
e
if
s
f
t
e
w
in
r
o
e
s
n
r
e
c
e
m
e
sp
a
i
o
n
n
n
t
m
i
s
c
e
o
c
s
d
o
h
e
n
a
l
t
v
e
p
e
n
re
t
a
f
q
p
e
u
p
re
a
ro
n
li
x
c
ty
e
i-
.
X counterfactual edit P 2 Theseassumptionsallowustotreatcounterfactualcompar-
isonsatfixedlengthasvalidsupervisionsignalsfortraining
content-awarerewardmodels.
Figure2:Responsedimensionoveranobservationedit(P 1 ) 3.1 OperationalDefinitionsofLengthandContent
andacounterfactual(P ).
2
Toenablequantifiablecontrolrequiredforcounterfactualdata
augmentation,wedefinelengthandcontent inoperational
termsthatallowconsistentmeasurementandmanipulation.
dimensionalmanifoldembeddedinaspacedefinedbycon-
Forlength,wepartitiontheempiricaltokendistributionof
tentandlength(Sec.C).Becausethesetwoattributesare
responsesintofivequantile-basedbins—VeryShort,Short,
often entangled in real-world data, changing one attribute
Medium,Long,andVeryLong—treatingresponseswithin
(e.g.,length)typicallyinducesashiftintheother(e.g.,con-
thesamebinasapproximatelyequalinlength.Forcontent,
tent). For instance, an observational edit moves along the
whichisalatentproperty,wedefineitthroughtherelational
responsemanifold—fromX toP —byvaryinglength,but
1 criterionofsemanticequivalence.Thisrelationaldefinition
oftenalterscontentimplicitly.Thisisanalogoustoediting
allowsustosystematicallydistinguishbetweenfixedcontent
animage:adjustinghairstylemayunintentionallyshiftper-
and varying content pairs for counterfactual construction.
ceivedgenderwhentheunderlyinglatentrepresentationdoes
Fixed Content: Responses that convey the same meaning
notcleanlyseparatethetwo.Toisolatetheeffectofasingle
despitevariationsintone,redundancy,orstructure.Varying
factor,wemustvaryonewhileholdingtheotherfixed.This
Content: Responses that differ in factuality, specificity, or
motivatescounterfactualedits,whichsimulateresponsesoff
intentwhilekeepingthelengthfixed.
thenaturalmanifold(e.g.,X P )—somethingnotachiev-
2
→
ablewithobservationaldataintheresponsemanifold.
4 LengthBiasMitigationPipeline
FeasibilityofCounterfactuals Anaturalquestionarises:
To implement our causal approach, we introduce a three-
howcanonegeneratecounterfactualdata,giventhatcoun-
stageframeworksummarizedinFig.3.Theprocessconsists
terfactualsbydefinitionpertaintoalternativeoutcomesthat
ofthreemainstages:(1)CounterfactualDataAugmentation:
didnotactuallyoccur?Inourcase,suchconstructionisfea-
Generateaugmentedresponsevariantsviacontrolledmanipu-
sible because the setting itself falls under the category of
lationoneitherresponselengthorsemanticcontent,keeping
realizablecounterfactuals(RaghavanandBareinboim2025),
theotherapproximatelyconstant.(2)BiasDiagnosis:Iden-
permittingtargetedinterventions(Level2inPCH)toapprox-
tifylength-drivenpreferenceflipsbyapplyingtargetedlength
imatecounterfactualoutcomes(Level3).2Wecantherefore
interventionswhilepreservingcontent.(3)BiasMitigation:
constructcounterfactualresponsesT
c˜,ℓ′
byindependentlyin-
Retraintherewardmodelusingcuratedcounterfactualsthat
terveningoncontentandlength:settingC c˜viasemantic
transplantationandL ℓ′viaprompt-leve ← lcontrol. isolatesemanticcontentfromstylisticfactorslikeverbosity.
←
Whenrewardmodelsarerepeatedlytrainedoncounterfac-
4.1 CounterfactualDataAugmentation
tualpreferencepairsinwhichbothresponseshaveidentical
Implementations
lengths,anyresidualpreferencesignalmustbeattributedto
semanticdifferences.Thisrepeatedexposureencouragesthe Todisentangletheeffectoflengthonreward,wegenerate
model to groundits judgments in content alone,gradually counterfactuallyaugmentedresponsepairsbymanipulating
attenuatingsensitivitytoverbosity.Ineffect,thisdecouples eithercontentorlengthwhilekeepingtheotherfactorapprox-
responselengthfromrewardestimationwithoutimpairing imatelyfixed.Theseaugmentationsproduceresponsepairs
semanticcontentoftheresponse.Asaresult,theinfluenceof aligned in length, enabling controlled comparisons under
lengthLonrewarddiminishes,allowingthemodeltobetter fixed-lengthconditionsduringrewardlearning.Weemploy
reflectcontent-drivendistinctions.Foraformaltreatmentof twocomplementaryaugmentationstrategies3:
thismechanism,seeSec.E.
• Length-fixedaugmentation:Givenatargetresponse,we
Our augmentation strategy relies on three key assump-
generate alternative responses that vary in factuality or
tions:(1)EachresponseT canbeapproximatelydecomposed
informativenessbyinterveningonthesemanticcontent
intotwofactors:latentcontentC andobservablelengthL,
whilekeepingthelengthapproximatelyfixed.Toachieve
such that their influence on the reward is fully mediated
this, we apply transformations such as detail removal,
2RaghavanandBareinboim(2025)formallyshowthatanL3 elaboration,informationsubstitution,orrewritingfigura-
distribution is realizable if and only if the target variables (e.g., tiveexpressionsintoliteraldescriptions.
contentCandlengthL)arenotsimultaneouslysubjecttoconflicting
interventionsonthesamecausalparent.SeeSec.Dfordetails. 3FullaugmentationproceduresareprovidedinSec.F.
input Counterfactual Bias Diagnosis Bias Mitigation
text pair Data Augmentation
A<latexit sha1_base64="DU72zZgqHlLM/MeK/CqKOoDqWOM=">AAACM3icbVDLSgMxFE3qq9ZHW126GSxC3ZQZkeqy6kZwU8E+oJ2WTJppQ5PMkGSEMsx/uNV/8GPEnbj1H0zbEezjQOBwzr2cm+OFjCpt2x8ws7G5tb2T3c3t7R8c5gvFo6YKIolJAwcskG0PKcKoIA1NNSPtUBLEPUZa3vhu6reeiVQ0EE96EhKXo6GgPsVIG6l304+7hLGkF5cfzpN+oWRX7BmsVeKkpARS1PtFmO8OAhxxIjRmSKmOY4fajZHUFDOS5LqRIiHCYzQkHUMF4kS58ezsxDozysDyA2me0NZM/b8RI67UhHtmkiM9UsveVFzreXyd3Im0f+3GVISRJgLP8/2IWTqwptVYAyoJ1mxiCMKSmi9YeIQkwtoUuBCgkFhK/1NMhc5yYaukeVFxqpXq42WpdpuWmQUn4BSUgQOuQA3cgzpoAAwkeAGv4A2+w0/4Bb/noxmY7hyDBcCfX0bAqkQ=</latexit> (K) A<latexit sha1_base64="ZHHu7RigAXJDoGDYo7+OE0BYh/c=">AAACMHicbVDLSgMxFE181vpoq0s3g0WomzIjUl1W3QhuKtgHTMeSSTNtaJIZkoxQhvkMt/oPfo2uxK1fYdqOYB8HAodz7uXcHD9iVGnb/oRr6xubW9u5nfzu3v5BoVg6bKkwlpg0cchC2fGRIowK0tRUM9KJJEHcZ6Ttj24nfvuZSEVD8ajHEfE4GggaUIy0kdzrXoLTp6Ryf5b2imW7ak9hLRMnI2WQodErwUK3H+KYE6ExQ0q5jh1pL0FSU8xImu/GikQIj9CAuIYKxInykunNqXVqlL4VhNI8oa2p+n8jQVypMffNJEd6qBa9ibjS8/kq2Y11cOUlVESxJgLP8oOYWTq0Jr1YfSoJ1mxsCMKSmi9YeIgkwtq0NxegkFhI/1NMhc5iYcukdV51atXaw0W5fpOVmQPH4ARUgAMuQR3cgQZoAgxC8AJewRt8hx/wC37PRtdgtnME5gB/fgGn6qjw</latexit> (K) uses in
A<latexit sha1_base64="sq5PxDLpc2TOTmPy6+xEb1D/W+E=">AAACJnicbVDLSgMxFM3UV62Ptrp0EyyCqzIjUl1W3bhswT6gHUomvdOGJpkhyQil9Avc6j/4Ne5E3Pkppu0I9nEgcDjnXs7NCWLOtHHdbyeztb2zu5fdzx0cHh3nC8WTpo4SRaFBIx6pdkA0cCahYZjh0I4VEBFwaAWjh5nfegalWSSfzDgGX5CBZCGjxFipftcrlNyyOwdeJ15KSihFrVd08t1+RBMB0lBOtO54bmz8CVGGUQ7TXDfREBM6IgPoWCqJAO1P5pdO8YVV+jiMlH3S4Ln6f2NChNZjEdhJQcxQr3ozcaMXiE1yJzHhrT9hMk4MSLrIDxOOTYRnbeA+U0ANH1tCqGL2C5gOiSLU2M6WAjSRK+l/iq3QWy1snTSvyl6lXKlfl6r3aZlZdIbO0SXy0A2qokdUQw1EEaAX9IrenHfnw/l0vhajGSfdOUVLcH5+AasXpOA=</latexit> A<latexit sha1_base64="U1uyGIfK/0b3xZaeCrg7IUlXQGU=">AAACM3icbVDLSgMxFE181vpoq0s3wSLUTZkRqS6rblxWsA/oi0yaaUOTzJBkhDLMf7jVf/BjxJ249R9M2xHs40DgcM69nJvjhZxp4zgfcGNza3tnN7OX3T84PMrlC8cNHUSK0DoJeKBaHtaUM0nrhhlOW6GiWHicNr3x/dRvPlOlWSCfzCSkXYGHkvmMYGOl3m0/7lDOk15cci+Sfr7olJ0Z0CpxU1IEKWr9Asx1BgGJBJWGcKx123VC042xMoxwmmQ7kaYhJmM8pG1LJRZUd+PZ2Qk6t8oA+YGyTxo0U/9vxFhoPRGenRTYjPSyNxXXep5YJ7cj4990YybDyFBJ5vl+xJEJ0LQaNGCKEsMnlmCimP0CIiOsMDG2wIUAjeVS+p9iK3SXC1sljcuyWylXHq+K1bu0zAw4BWegBFxwDargAdRAHRCgwAt4BW/wHX7CL/g9H92A6c4JWAD8+QUY2Koq</latexit> ( ω 1) ω .<latexit sha1_base64="TzJnuoVt8xPGy6uF3lxfsdP+f3E=">AAACSXicbVDLSgMxFM20Pmp9tbp0EyyCCykzItVl0Y3LCvYB7VAymUwbmseQZIQy9CPc6if5BX6GO3Flph3BPg4EDuc+zs0JYka1cd1Pp1Dc2t7ZLe2V9w8Oj44r1ZOOlonCpI0lk6oXIE0YFaRtqGGkFyuCeMBIN5g8ZPXuC1GaSvFspjHxORoJGlGMjJW6AxqG0uhhpebW3TngOvFyUgM5WsOqczUIJU44EQYzpHXfc2Pjp0gZihmZlQeJJjHCEzQifUsF4kT76fzeGbywSggjqewTBs7V/xMp4lpPeWA7OTJjvVrLxI21gG+S+4mJ7vyUijgxROCFf5QwaCTMMoEhVQQbNrUEYUXtFyAeI4WwscktGWS7s8A2umskVk77U2y+3mqa66RzXfca9cbTTa15nyddAmfgHFwCD9yCJngELdAGGEzAK3gD786H8+V8Oz+L1oKTz5yCJRSKv5DYsqo=</latexit>.. A<latexit sha1_base64="vMYO83MABUwPRR+MXJZpeKxugVg=">AAACMHicbVDLSgMxFE3qq9ZHW126GSxC3ZQZkeqy6sZlBfuA6VgyaaYNTTJDkhHKMJ/hVv/Br9GVuPUrTNsR7ONA4HDOvZyb40eMKm3bnzC3sbm1vZPfLeztHxwWS+WjtgpjiUkLhyyUXR8pwqggLU01I91IEsR9Rjr++G7qd56JVDQUj3oSEY+joaABxUgbyb3pJzh9SqrOedovVeyaPYO1SpyMVECGZr8Mi71BiGNOhMYMKeU6dqS9BElNMSNpoRcrEiE8RkPiGioQJ8pLZjen1plRBlYQSvOEtmbq/40EcaUm3DeTHOmRWvam4lrP5+tkN9bBtZdQEcWaCDzPD2Jm6dCa9mINqCRYs4khCEtqvmDhEZIIa9PeQoBCYin9TzEVOsuFrZL2Rc2p1+oPl5XGbVZmHpyAU1AFDrgCDXAPmqAFMAjBC3gFb/AdfsAv+D0fzcFs5xgsAP78AnoCqNY=</latexit> ( c 1) c .<latexit sha1_base64="TzJnuoVt8xPGy6uF3lxfsdP+f3E=">AAACSXicbVDLSgMxFM20Pmp9tbp0EyyCCykzItVl0Y3LCvYB7VAymUwbmseQZIQy9CPc6if5BX6GO3Flph3BPg4EDuc+zs0JYka1cd1Pp1Dc2t7ZLe2V9w8Oj44r1ZOOlonCpI0lk6oXIE0YFaRtqGGkFyuCeMBIN5g8ZPXuC1GaSvFspjHxORoJGlGMjJW6AxqG0uhhpebW3TngOvFyUgM5WsOqczUIJU44EQYzpHXfc2Pjp0gZihmZlQeJJjHCEzQifUsF4kT76fzeGbywSggjqewTBs7V/xMp4lpPeWA7OTJjvVrLxI21gG+S+4mJ7vyUijgxROCFf5QwaCTMMoEhVQQbNrUEYUXtFyAeI4WwscktGWS7s8A2umskVk77U2y+3mqa66RzXfca9cbTTa15nyddAmfgHFwCD9yCJngELdAGGEzAK3gD786H8+V8Oz+L1oKTz5yCJRSKv5DYsqo=</latexit>.. <latexit sha1_base64="mqOGsmRgJxv3nf6I2TzUVwYtlSE=">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</latexit> K K RM training
1 f(k) + f(k) >K i<latexit sha1_base64="ipGjEFJW0qe5G2gfULe61lWoRfs=">AAACOXicbVDLSgMxFM3UV62PPly6CRbBVZkRqS6LblxWsK3QlpJJM21okhmSO9IyzK+41X/wS1y6E7f+gOlDsI8DgcM593Jujh8JbsB1P5zM1vbO7l52P3dweHScLxRLTRPGmrIGDUWon3ximOCKNYCDYE+RZkT6grX80d3Ubz0zbXioHmESsa4kA8UDTglYqVcodYCNwQQJD3Da8WXipb1C2a24M+B14i1IGS1Q7xWdfKcf0lgyBVQQY9qeG0E3IRo4FSzNdWLDIkJHZMDalioimekms+NTfG6VPg5CbZ8CPFP/byREGjORvp2UBIZm1ZuKGz1fbpLbMQQ33YSrKAam6Dw/iAWGEE8Lwn2uGQUxsYRQze0XMB0STSjYGpcCDFEr6X+KrdBbLWydNC8rXrVSfbgq124XZWbRKTpDF8hD16iG7lEdNRBFY/SCXtGb8+58Ol/O93w04yx2TtASnJ9fG5Wsrw==</latexit>f1
B<latexit sha1_base64="cFZML6y4+L3PbUD+6hMPhs+TaWU=">AAACJnicbVDLSgMxFL1TX7U+2urSTbAIrsqMSHVZ6sZlC/YB7VAyadqGJpkhyQhl6Be41X/wa9yJuPNTTNsR7ONA4HDOvZybE0ScaeO6305mZ3dv/yB7mDs6PjnNF4pnLR3GitAmCXmoOgHWlDNJm4YZTjuRolgEnLaDycPcbz9TpVkon8w0or7AI8mGjGBjpUatXyi5ZXcBtEm8lJQgRb1fdPK9QUhiQaUhHGvd9dzI+AlWhhFOZ7lerGmEyQSPaNdSiQXVfrK4dIaurDJAw1DZJw1aqP83Eiy0norATgpsxnrdm4tbvUBsk7uxGd77CZNRbKgky/xhzJEJ0bwNNGCKEsOnlmCimP0CImOsMDG2s5UAjeVa+p9iK/TWC9skrZuyVylXGrelai0tMwsXcAnX4MEdVOER6tAEAhRe4BXenHfnw/l0vpajGSfdOYcVOD+/rNmk4Q==</latexit> LLM B<latexit sha1_base64="/qG7BZXqVkHLM4U31BSZe/C3tr4=">AAACM3icbVDLSgMxFE181vpoq0s3wSLUTZkRqS5L3bisYB/QTksmTdvQJDMkGaEM8x9u9R/8GHEnbv0H03YE+zgQOJxzL+fm+CFn2jjOB9za3tnd288cZA+Pjk9y+cJpUweRIrRBAh6oto815UzShmGG03aoKBY+py1/cj/zW89UaRbIJzMNqSfwSLIhI9hYqVfrx13KedKLS+5V0s8XnbIzB1onbkqKIEW9X4C57iAgkaDSEI617rhOaLwYK8MIp0m2G2kaYjLBI9qxVGJBtRfPz07QpVUGaBgo+6RBc/X/RoyF1lPh20mBzVivejNxo+eLTXInMsM7L2YyjAyVZJE/jDgyAZpVgwZMUWL41BJMFLNfQGSMFSbGFrgUoLFcSf9TbIXuamHrpHlddivlyuNNsVpLy8yAc3ABSsAFt6AKHkAdNAABCryAV/AG3+En/ILfi9EtmO6cgSXAn18ap6or</latexit> ω ( B<latexit sha1_base64="pXW4mqc7/IK46NERYHHllqXuqEw=">AAACM3icbVDLSgMxFM3UV62Ptrp0EyxC3ZQZkeqy1I3gpoJ9QDstmTTThiaZIckIZZj/cKv/4MeIO3HrP5i2I9jHgcDhnHs5N8cLGVXatj+szNb2zu5edj93cHh0nC8UT1oqiCQmTRywQHY8pAijgjQ11Yx0QkkQ9xhpe5O7md9+JlLRQDzpaUhcjkaC+hQjbaR+fRD3CGNJPy4/XCaDQsmu2HPAdeKkpARSNAZFK98bBjjiRGjMkFJdxw61GyOpKWYkyfUiRUKEJ2hEuoYKxIly4/nZCbwwyhD6gTRPaDhX/2/EiCs15Z6Z5EiP1ao3Ezd6Ht8kdyPt37oxFWGkicCLfD9iUAdwVg0cUkmwZlNDEJbUfAHiMZIIa1PgUoBCYiX9TzEVOquFrZPWVcWpVqqP16VaPS0zC87AOSgDB9yAGrgHDdAEGEjwAl7Bm/VufVpf1vdiNGOlO6dgCdbPL0iPqkU=</latexit> 1)ω (K .<latexit sha1_base64="TzJnuoVt8xPGy6uF3lxfsdP+f3E=">AAACSXicbVDLSgMxFM20Pmp9tbp0EyyCCykzItVl0Y3LCvYB7VAymUwbmseQZIQy9CPc6if5BX6GO3Flph3BPg4EDuc+zs0JYka1cd1Pp1Dc2t7ZLe2V9w8Oj44r1ZOOlonCpI0lk6oXIE0YFaRtqGGkFyuCeMBIN5g8ZPXuC1GaSvFspjHxORoJGlGMjJW6AxqG0uhhpebW3TngOvFyUgM5WsOqczUIJU44EQYzpHXfc2Pjp0gZihmZlQeJJjHCEzQifUsF4kT76fzeGbywSggjqewTBs7V/xMp4lpPeWA7OTJjvVrLxI21gG+S+4mJ7vyUijgxROCFf5QwaCTMMoEhVQQbNrUEYUXtFyAeI4WwscktGWS7s8A2umskVk77U2y+3mqa66RzXfca9cbTTa15nyddAmfgHFwCD9yCJngELdAGGEzAK3gD786H8+V8Oz+L1oKTz5yCJRSKv5DYsqo=</latexit>.. ) B<latexit sha1_base64="TgQKBKsXhZNycAO8ekEqX+gpEtI=">AAACMHicbVDLSgMxFM3UV62Ptrp0EyxC3ZQZkeqy1I3LCvYB07Fk0kwbmkmGJCOUYT7Drf6DX6MrcetXmLYj2MeBwOGcezk3x48YVdq2P63c1vbO7l5+v3BweHRcLJVPOkrEEpM2FkzIno8UYZSTtqaakV4kCQp9Rrr+5G7md5+JVFTwRz2NiBeiEacBxUgbyW0OEpw+JVXnMh2UKnbNngOuEycjFZChNShbxf5Q4DgkXGOGlHIdO9JegqSmmJG00I8ViRCeoBFxDeUoJMpL5jen8MIoQxgIaR7XcK7+30hQqNQ09M1kiPRYrXozcaPnh5tkN9bBrZdQHsWacLzID2IGtYCzXuCQSoI1mxqCsKTmCxCPkURYm/aWAhTiK+l/iqnQWS1snXSuak69Vn+4rjSaWZl5cAbOQRU44AY0wD1ogTbAQIAX8ArerHfrw/qyvhejOSvbOQVLsH5+AXvOqNc=</latexit> c ( B 1 <latexit sha1_base64="DbNIvW6a0P8mSxWcJLxN1DC9KGw=">AAACMHicbVDLSgMxFE3qq9ZHW126GSxC3ZQZkeqy1I3gpoKthelYMmmmDc0kQ5IRyjCf4Vb/wa/Rlbj1K0zbEezjQOBwzr2cm+NHjCpt258wt7G5tb2T3y3s7R8cFkvlo44SscSkjQUTsusjRRjlpK2pZqQbSYJCn5FHf3wz9R+fiVRU8Ac9iYgXoiGnAcVIG8lt9hOcPiXVu/O0X6rYNXsGa5U4GamADK1+GRZ7A4HjkHCNGVLKdexIewmSmmJG0kIvViRCeIyGxDWUo5AoL5ndnFpnRhlYgZDmcW3N1P8bCQqVmoS+mQyRHqllbyqu9fxwnezGOrj2EsqjWBOO5/lBzCwtrGkv1oBKgjWbGIKwpOYLFh4hibA27S0EKMSX0v8UU6GzXNgq6VzUnHqtfn9ZaTSzMvPgBJyCKnDAFWiAW9ACbYCBAC/gFbzBd/gBv+D3fDQHs51jsAD48wuptqjx</latexit> ) c (K .<latexit sha1_base64="TzJnuoVt8xPGy6uF3lxfsdP+f3E=">AAACSXicbVDLSgMxFM20Pmp9tbp0EyyCCykzItVl0Y3LCvYB7VAymUwbmseQZIQy9CPc6if5BX6GO3Flph3BPg4EDuc+zs0JYka1cd1Pp1Dc2t7ZLe2V9w8Oj44r1ZOOlonCpI0lk6oXIE0YFaRtqGGkFyuCeMBIN5g8ZPXuC1GaSvFspjHxORoJGlGMjJW6AxqG0uhhpebW3TngOvFyUgM5WsOqczUIJU44EQYzpHXfc2Pjp0gZihmZlQeJJjHCEzQifUsF4kT76fzeGbywSggjqewTBs7V/xMp4lpPeWA7OTJjvVrLxI21gG+S+4mJ7vyUijgxROCFf5QwaCTMMoEhVQQbNrUEYUXtFyAeI4WwscktGWS7s8A2umskVk77U2y+3mqa66RzXfca9cbTTa15nyddAmfgHFwCD9yCJngELdAGGEzAK3gD786H8+V8Oz+L1oKTz5yCJRSKv5DYsqo=</latexit>.. ) !" #k=1 A( l k),B #k= f 1 <latexit sha1_base64="7bIFp+KY2XiGT1e3jxlOGe03yGI=">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</latexit> (k A ) ,B : l (k 1 ) [ $ ˆy(k)= % y]
Content Length A,B →
fixed fixed <latexit sha1_base64="iVawYhLfevR7Tfaua5QZtgH36gU=">AAACMnicbVDLSgMxFE3qq9ZHW126CRahbsqMSHVZdOOygn1AO5ZMmmlDM5kxyQjDMN/hVv/Bn9GduPUjTNsR7ONA4HDOvZyb44acKW1ZHzC3sbm1vZPfLeztHxwWS+WjtgoiSWiLBDyQXRcrypmgLc00p91QUuy7nHbcye3U7zxTqVggHnQcUsfHI8E8RrA2ktMfY53E6WNSnZyng1LFqlkzoFViZ6QCMjQHZVjsDwMS+VRowrFSPdsKtZNgqRnhNC30I0VDTCZ4RHuGCuxT5SSzq1N0ZpQh8gJpntBopv7fSLCvVOy7ZtLHeqyWvam41nP9dXIv0t61kzARRpoKMs/3Io50gKbNoCGTlGgeG4KJZOYLiIyxxESb/hYCFBZL6X+KqdBeLmyVtC9qdr1Wv7+sNG6yMvPgBJyCKrDBFWiAO9AELUDAE3gBr+ANvsNP+AW/56M5mO0cgwXAn18Swqoz</latexit>ˆy(k): RM’s winning response
<latexit sha1_base64="6vHaIbZXpGagykPGnPG8eqkS8rs=">AAACJnicbVDLSgMxFE3qq9ZHW126GSyCqzIjUl0W3bhswT6gHUomvW1Dk8yQZIRh6Be41X/wa9yJuPNTTNsRbO2BwOGcezk3J4g408Z1v3Bua3tndy+/Xzg4PDoulsonbR3GikKLhjxU3YBo4ExCyzDDoRspICLg0Amm93O/8wRKs1A+miQCX5CxZCNGibFSMxmUKm7VXcD5T7yMVFCGxqCMi/1hSGMB0lBOtO55bmT8lCjDKIdZoR9riAidkjH0LJVEgPbTxaUz58IqQ2cUKvukcRbq342UCK0TEdhJQcxEr3tzcaMXiE1yLzajWz9lMooNSLrMH8XcMaEzb8MZMgXU8MQSQhWzX3DohChCje1sJUATuZb+q9gKvfXC/pP2VdWrVWvN60r9Liszj87QObpEHrpBdfSAGqiFKAL0jF7QK37D7/gDfy5HczjbOUUrwN8/DZalGA==</latexit>y : original response
Figure3:Overviewofourmethod.Wegeneratelength-andcontent-fixedcounterfactualsandusethemforbiasdiagnosisand
rewardmodeltraining.
ContentQuality Shorter Same Longer bycontrolledlengthinterventionsusingcontent-fixedaug-
Better ✓ ✓ ✓ mented responses. A preference flip occurs when the re-
Same ✗ ✗ lengthbias
ward model reverses its ranking of a response pair solely
Worse ✗ lengthbias lengthbias
duetoachangeinlength,withsemanticcontentheldcon-
stant.LetR(X,T)denotetherewardscoreassignedtore-
Table 1: Rules for diagnosing length bias based on the
sponseT givenpromptX.Supposetheoriginalmodelpref-
winningresponse’scontentqualityandrelativelength:the
model’s preference is acceptable (✓), implausible (✗), or erence is R(X,A) > R(X,B). A preference flip is said
to occur if, for a counterfactual variant A′ or B′ with the
likelyindicativeoflengthbias(lengthbias).
samecontentbutalteredlength,therankingreverses—e.g.,
R(X,A′) < R(X,B)orR(X,A) < R(X,B′).Whenthe
model initiallyprefers the longer responsebut reverses its
• Content-fixedaugmentation:Givenatargetresponse,we
choiceafteracontent-preservinglengthadjustment,weinter-
generatealternativesthatvaryinverbositybyintervening
pretthisasevidencethattheoriginalpreferencewasdriven
on length while preserving the original meaning. Here,
byverbosityratherthansemanticquality.
thelengthisalignedtothatofthereferenceresponseused
Foreachoriginalpreferencepair(A,B),wegenerateK
to determine the original preference label. To preserve
content-fixedlengthvariantsandevaluatethemodel’sconsis-
semanticcontentwhilevaryinglength,weapplysurface-
tencyagainstthem(e.g.,AvsB′,AvsB′,etc.).Apairis
level augmentations such as filler insertion (deletion), 1 2
consideredbiasedifthenumberofpreferenceflipsexceeds
pleonasm (simplification), redundant sentence reusing
half of the number of counterfactuals. Formally, we apply
(pruning),paraphrasing,andformatchanges.
the indicator function 1[( K f (k) + K f (k)) > K],
After generating responses, it is essential to verify that wheref (k) =1[yˆ(k) =y]den k o = t 1 es A a l flipped k p = re 1 fer B e l nceunder
theintended factorhas beensuccessfullymanipulated. As Al ̸ (cid:80) (cid:80)
the k-th intervention on response A, and y is the original
described in Sec. 3.1, length is operationalized via token-
modelpreferencelabel—i.e.,theresponsethatwasfavored
level binning, enabling automatic verification through bin
intheoriginal(A,B)pair.Thiscriteriondetectscaseswhere
membership.Incontrast,contentisalatentpropertythatcan-
lengthchangesaloneconsistentlyaltermodeldecisions.
notbereliablyassessedusingsimpleheuristics.Toensure
Togeneralizethisdiagnosis,wedefinetheflipratioF:
fidelity,weapplyautomatededitingstrategiesfollowedbyse-
manticfilteringusingabinaryclassifierthatcheckswhether
#offlippedpreferences
semanticcontentispreserved.Theseverificationstepscon- F = .
(A,B) Totalcounterfactualcomparisons
firmwhethertheintendedmanipulationwassuccessfuland
enhancetheoverallqualityoftheaugmenteddata.
PairswithF > 0.5areflaggedaslength-biased.Thiscon-
tinuousmetricenablesscalableandautomateddiagnostics
4.2 DiagnosingLengthBias
alignedwiththerule-basedintuition,whileprovidingfine-
Wedefineadiagnosticruletable(Table1)thatcategorizes grainedcontrolfordownstreamfilteringandtraining.
eachcasebasedontherelativecontentqualityandlengthof
thewinningresponse,anddetermineswhetherthemodel’s Finalcounterfactualdatausedforbiasmitigation. After
preferenceisattributabletocontentorlikelyinfluencedby identifyingbias-proneexamplesviapreferenceflips,wese-
length bias. According to this scheme, length bias is diag- lectivelyusecounterfactuallyaugmentedresponsepairsfor
nosedwhenthemodelprefersalongerresponsewithworse rewardmodeltraining.Forresponsepairsthatexhibitlength
content,excludingtiesfrombothdiagnosisandtraining. bias—i.e.,morethanhalfofthecontent-fixedcounterfactual
pairs result in preference flips—we include the flipped ex-
Preference flips. To scale up the diagnostic rules in Ta- amples in the training set. In addition, we incorporate the
ble 1 for large-scale evaluation, we introduce a binary de- length-fixedvariantsoftheoriginalresponsestofurtherdis-
cision rule based on preference flips, which are induced entanglelengthfromcontentduringrewardlearning.


=== NeurIPS-2023-principle-driven-self-alignment-of-language-models-from-scratch-with-minimal-human-supervision.pdf ===
Principle-Driven Self-Alignment of Language Models
from Scratch with Minimal Human Supervision
ZhiqingSun1∗ YikangShen2 QinhongZhou3
HongxinZhang3 ZhenfangChen2 DavidCox2
YimingYang1 ChuangGan2,3
1LanguageTechnologiesInstitute,CMU
2MIT-IBMWatsonAILab,IBMResearch
3UMassAmherst
https://github.com/IBM/Dromedary
Abstract
RecentAI-assistantagents,suchasChatGPT,predominantlyrelyonsupervised
fine-tuning(SFT)withhumanannotationsandreinforcementlearningfromhuman
feedback (RLHF) to align the output of large language models (LLMs) with
humanintentions,ensuringtheyarehelpful,ethical,andreliable. However,this
dependencecansignificantlyconstrainthetruepotentialofAI-assistantagentsdue
tothehighcostofobtaininghumansupervisionandtherelatedissuesonquality,
reliability, diversity, self-consistency, and undesirable biases. To address these
challenges,weproposeanovelapproachcalled SELF-ALIGN,whichcombines
principle-drivenreasoningandthegenerativepowerofLLMsfortheself-alignment
oftheAIagentswithminimalhumansupervision.
Applying SELF-ALIGN totheLLaMA-65bbaselanguagemodel,wedevelopan
AIassistantnamedDromedary . Withfewerthan300linesofhumananno-
tations(including< 200seedprompts,16genericprinciples,and5exemplars
for in-context learning), Dromedary significantly surpasses the performance of
severalstate-of-the-artAIsystems, includingText-Davinci-003andAlpaca,
on benchmark datasets with various settings. We have open-sourced the code,
LoRAweightsofDromedary,andoursynthetictrainingdatatoencouragefurther
researchintoaligningLLM-basedAIagentswithenhancedsupervisionefficiency,
reducedbiases,andimprovedcontrollability.
1 Introduction
Theproblemofaligninglargelanguagemodels(LLMs)tohumanvaluesandintentionsinterms
ofbeingcomprehensive,respectful,andcompliant1 [10,32,30,4,5,27]hasgainedsignificant
attentioninresearchasrecentAIsystems(likeChatGPTorGPT-4)haverapidlyadvancedintheir
capabilities[12,33,7,9]. Presently,state-of-the-artAIsystemspredominantlydependonsupervised
fine-tuning(SFT)withhumaninstructionsandannotations,aswellasreinforcementlearningfrom
humanfeedback(RLHF)ontheirpreferences[26,28,29,2]. Thesuccessofthesetechniquesheavily
∗Correspondence:zhiqings@cs.cmu.edu.
1ThisisthedefinitionofAIalignmentinthispaper,distinctfromfollowingsimpleinstructions[30,48,42].
37thConferenceonNeuralInformationProcessingSystems(NeurIPS2023).
(Topic-Guided Red-Teaming) Self-Instruct
195seed prompts
w/ 7rules for new instruction generation
360k synthetic prompts
1 (ethical).
Dromedary should actively Principle-Driven Self-Alignment
refrain users on illegal, 16principles for AI assistant to follow
immoral, or harmful topics, w/ 5in-context learning demonstrations
prioritizing user safety,
ethical conduct, and
responsible behavior in its
responses. 260k(after filtering) self-aligned responses < 300 lines of
2 (informative). to synthetic prompts human annotations
Dromedary should provide
users with accurate,
relevant, and up-to-date Principle Engraving
information in its Fine-tuning the original model after
responses, ensuring that pruning principles and demonstrations
the content is both
educational and engaging. (non-verbose)
… 360k self-aligned & verbose (by prompting) responses
to synthetic prompts
Verbose Cloning
Refining the model to produce in-
depth and detailed responses
(final)
Figure1: AnillustrationofthefouressentialstagesintheSELF-ALIGNprocess
reliesontheavailabilityofextensivehumansupervision,whichisnotonlyexpensivetoobtainbut
alsohaspotentialissueswiththequality,reliability,diversity,creativity,self-consistence,undesirable
biases,etc.,inhuman-providedannotations[48,20,47].
ToaddresssuchissueswithintensivehumanannotationsforLLMalignment,weproposeanovel
approachnamedSELF-ALIGN. Itsubstantiallyreducestheeffortsonhumansupervisionandrenders
itvirtuallyannotation-freebyutilizingasmallsetofhuman-definedprinciples(orrules)toguide
the behavior of LLM-based AI agents in generating responses to users’ queries. Our approach
encompassesfouressentialstages:
1. (Topic-GuidedRed-Teaming)Self-Instruct: Weemploytheself-instructmechanismbyWang
etal.[48]with175seedpromptstogeneratesyntheticinstructions,plus20topic-specificprompts
inadditiontoensureadiversifiedtopiccoverageoftheinstructions. Suchinstructionsensurea
comprehensiverangeofcontexts/scenariosfortheAIsystemtolearnfrom.
2. Principle-DrivenSelf-Alignment:Weofferasmallsetof16human-writtenprinciplesinEnglish
aboutthedesirablequalityofthesystem-producedresponses,ortherulesbehindthebehavior
oftheAImodelinproducinganswers2. Theseprinciplesfunctionasguidelinesforgenerating
helpful, ethical, and reliable responses. We conduct in-context learning (ICL) [7] with a few
(5)exemplars(demonstrations)thatillustratehowtheAIsystemcomplieswiththeruleswhen
formulatingresponsesindifferentcases. Fromthehuman-writtenprinciples,ICLexemplars,and
theincomingself-instructedprompts,theLLMcantriggerthematchingrulesandgeneratethe
explanationsforarefusedanswerifthequeryisdetectedasaharmfulorill-formedone.
3. Principle Engraving: In the third stage, we fine-tune the original LLM (the base model) on
theself-alignedresponses,generatedbytheLLMitselfthroughprompting,whilepruningthe
principles and demonstrations for the fine-tuned model. The fine-tuning process enables our
systemtodirectlygenerateresponsesthatarewell-alignedwiththehelpful,ethical,andreliable
principlesacrossawiderangeofqueries,duetosharedmodelparameters. Noticethatthefine-
tunedLLMcandirectlygeneratehigh-qualityresponsesfornewquerieswithoutexplicitlyusing
theprinciplesetandtheICLexemplars.
4. VerboseCloning:Lastly,weemploycontextdistillation[18,3]toenhancethesystem’scapability
toproducemorecomprehensiveandelaborateresponsesthantheoverlyshortorindirectresponses.
Impressively, the entire SELF-ALIGN process necessitates fewer than 300 lines of annotations
(including195seedprompts,16principles,and5exemplars),whilepreviousalignedAIsystems
suchasInstructGPT[30]orAlpaca[42]requiredatleast50Khuman/teacherannotations. This
2Thedetailedprinciplesaregivenintheappendix.AnalogoustoConstitutionalAI[5],thedesignofthese
principlesinSELF-ALIGNremainsexploratoryandprimarilyservesresearchpurposes.
2
Table1: Comparisonofhuman/teachersupervisionsusedinrecentAIsystems. Thealignmenttech-
niquesusedinpreviousworkincludeSFT(SupervisedFine-tuning),RLHF(ReinforcementLearning
fromHumanFeedback),CAI(ConstitutionalAI),andKD(KnowledgeDistillation). Informationis
from: aOpenAI[29],bOpenAI[26],cBaietal.[5],Anthropic[2],dOpenAI[27].
TotalAnnotations AnnotationSources AlignmentTechniques
(closed-sourcemodels)
InstructGPT 77K Users&Annotators SFT&RLHF
Text-Davinci-003 ? ? SFT&RLHFa
ChatGPT ? ? SFT&RLHFb
Claude ? ? RLHF&CAIc
GPT-4 ? ? SFT&RLHF&CAId
(open-sourcemodels)
Alpaca 52K Text-Davinci-003 Self-Instruct&KD
Vicuna 70K Users&ChatGPT KD
Koala 472K Humans&TeacherModels KD&SFT
OpenAssistant 161K Annotators SFT&RLHF
Dolly-V2 15K Annotators SFT
Dromedary <300lines Humans Self-Instruct&Self-Align
highlightsthesupervisionefficiencyofourapproachincomparisonwithotherstate-of-the-artAI
assistants,asshowninTable.1. Ourprinciple-drivenapproach,whichisessentiallyrule-based,not
only significantly reduces the required human effort for supervision but also showcases aligning
neural language models with human understanding of principles or rules about quality language
generationinbothaneffectiveandefficientmanner.
WeshouldalsopointoutthattheadvancementsofrecentmodelslikeAlpacaandVicunahaveshown
thatthepotentconversationalcapabilitiescanbeobtainedbydistillingexistinghuman-preference-
alignedLLMs(i.e.,Text-Davinci-003andChatGPT,respectively)intosmaller,moremanageable
models[42,8,29,26].Thoseresultingsmallermodels,however,stillrelyonthesuccessfulalignment
ofexistingLLMs,whicharebasedonextensivehuman-providedsupervision. Inotherwords,those
smallermodelsindirectlyinheritthedependenceontheavailabilityofintensivesupervisionfrom
humans. Incontrast,ourapproachfocusesonlanguagemodelalignmentfromscratch,independent
fromtheexistenceofwell-alignedLLMslikeChatGPTorGPT-4. Thatisthemaindistinctionofour
approachfromotherexistingapproachesandiswhywecallitself-alignmentfromscratch.
Weareprovidingthecodeforthe SELF-ALIGN methodasopensourcetopromotecollaboration
andinnovationwithintheresearchcommunity. ThebasemodelofDromedary istheLLaMA-65b
languagemodel[44],whichisaccessibleforresearch-only,noncommercialpurposes. Byinvesti-
gatingdifferentstrategiesfromthatinRLHF,ourworkseekstobroadenthescopeofAIalignment
techniques,andpromoteadeeperunderstandingofhowtoimproveAIsystems,notonlyintermsof
beingmorepowerful,butalsomoreresponsibleandwell-alignedwithhumanvalues.
2 RelatedWorks
AIAlignment ThedomainofAIalignment[13]hasgarneredsubstantialattentioninrecentyears,
withLLMsexhibitingremarkableproficienciesacrossawidearrayoftasks. GPT-4[27]epitomizes
thisdevelopment,implementingapost-trainingalignmentprocesstobolsterfactualityandadherence
todesiredbehavior,whileconcurrentlymitigatingpotentialrisks. Aprominentstrategyforaligning
languagemodelswithhumanvaluesentailsfine-tuningviahumanfeedback. Notably,Ouyangetal.
[30]andBaietal.[4]utilizedreinforcementlearningfromhumanfeedback(RLHF)torefinemodels,
enhancinghelpfulnessandtruthfulness,anddiminishingtoxicoutputgeneration. Thistechnique
requiresextensivehumanannotations.
ConstitutionalAI(CAI)orself-critique[5,27]investigatesself-improvementwithouthumanlabels
forharmfuloutputs,leveragingAI-generatedself-critiques,revisions,andpreferencemodels. Based
onalistofhuman-generatedrulesorprinciples,thisapproachfosterstheevolutionofsafe,reliable,
andeffectiveAIsystemswithincreasedbehavioralprecisionandreduceddependencyonhuman
labels. BothSELF-ALIGNandCAIarerule-basedalignmenttechniquesforpowerfulAIsystems.
However,therearesubstantialdifferencesbetweenthem,asoutlinedbelow:
3
SFT + RLHF(Ouyang et al., 2022) Self-Align (Ours)
(Topic-Guided Red-Teaming) Self-Instruct
User/Annotator Prompt 195seed prompts
Collection & Filtering w/ 7rules for new instruction generation
360k synthetic prompts
Principle-Driven Self-Alignment
Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) 16principles for AI assistant to follow
13kprompts and human annotations w/ 5in-context learning demonstrations
260k(after filtering) self-aligned responses
to synthetic prompts
Principle Engraving
Reward Model Fine-tuning the original model after
33kprompts and human preferences pruning principles and demonstrations
(non-verbose)
360k self-aligned & verbose (by prompting) responses
to synthetic prompts
31kuse P r P p O ro m fin pt e s - f t r u o n m i n c g ustomers Re d f e in p i t n h g V a t e n h r d e b m d o e s o t e d a e i C le l l t d o o r n p e i r s n o p g d o u n c s e e s in-
InstructGPT (final)
77k+ total human annotations < 300 lines of human annotations
Figure 2: Side-by-side comparison: on the left is a typical SFT + RLHF alignment pipeline
(InstructGPT[30]),andontherightarethefourstagesinourSELF-ALIGNprocedure.
• Intheprinciple-drivenself-alignmentprocedureofSELF-ALIGN,thelanguagemodelitselfde-
termineswhichrulestoadheretogivenuserqueries,anditsubsequentlygeneratesappropriate
responsesconditionalonthesequeriesandrules. Conversely,CAIemploysaself-critiquemethod-
ology;givenapaircomprisingauserqueryandthemodel’sresponse,itselectsaruletoscrutinize
theexistingresponse,therebyyieldingarefinedoutput.
• The self-critique nature of CAI necessitates RLHF warm-up. In stark contrast, SELF-ALIGN
exploresthealignmentoflanguagemodelsfromscratch,requiringminimalhumansupervision.
• However,onelimitationofSELF-ALIGNistherequirementtoincludeallruleswithinthecontext,
aprocessboundbythebaselanguagemodel’stokenlimit. Incontrast,theCAItechniqueisnot
subjecttothistokenlimitconstraint3asapost-generationself-critiquemethod.
State-of-the-artAIAssistants State-of-the-artAI-assistantagentshavesignificantlyadvancedin
recentyears,withInstructGPT[30]leadingthewayasthefirstmodeltrainedwithsupervisedfine-
tuning(SFT)andreinforcementlearningfromhumanfeedback(RLHF)onuserqueries. ChatGPT
[26],asiblingmodeltoInstructGPT,hasgarneredwidespreadsuccessasacommercialAIassistant,
showcasingitsabilitytofollowinstructionsinpromptsandprovidedetailedresponses. Alpaca[42],
asasubsequentopen-sourcemodel,wasdevelopedusingSelf-Instruct[48]tolearntheknowledge
from Text-Davinci-003 (similar to InstructGPT) [29], offering cost-effective and accessible
alternatives. In parallel, models like Vicuna, Koala, and Baize [8, 15, 50] have been trained
onChatGPToutputs,essentiallydistillingtheChatGPTmodeltocreatenewopen-sourcechatbots.
Dolly-V2[11],anotheropen-sourceeffort,utilizes15knewinstruction-followingdatapointsfor
training. OpenAssistant[20]followsasimilarapproachtoChatGPTbycollectingitsowndata.
TheseadvancementsinAIassistantscontinuetopushtheboundariesofusabilityandaccessibility,
makingsignificantstridesintheopen-sourcedomains.
OurSELF-ALIGNapproachdistinguishesitselfbyconcentratingonthecreationofnovelalignment
techniquesforLLMs, developedfromthegroundupandindependentofestablishedAIsystems,
whilerequiringminimalhumansupervision. Thisresearchdirectionaimstoinvestigatethepotential
ofaligningAImodelsundercircumstanceswheredependenceonoraccesstoexistingsystemsmay
beunfeasibleorunfavorable. AcomparisonofannotationcostbetweenSELF-ALIGNandprevious
methodsisshowninTable.1andFigure.2.
3Forexample,thelatestClaudeemploysatleast58rules[1].
4


=== OffsetBias Leveraging Debiased Data for Tuning Evaluators.pdf ===
OffsetBias: Leveraging Debiased Data for Tuning Evaluators
JunsooPark1* SeungyeonJwa1* MeiyingRen1 DaeyoungKim1 SanghyukChoi1,2†
1NCResearch 2NAVERCloud
{junsoopark,seungyeonjwa,mia1211,daeyoungk}@ncsoft.com
sanghyuk.choi@navercorp.com
Abstract
Instruction: Is eating orange good for our health?
Employing Large Language Models (LLMs)
Judge Model’s

Response A Response B
to assess the quality of generated responses, Preference
such as prompting instruct-tuned models or Eating oranges is good A > B Eating apples is good
for well-being. for well-being.
fine-tuningjudgemodels,hasbecomeawidely
adopted evaluation method. It is also known According to a study According to a study
published in the Journal of published in the Journal of
that such evaluators are vulnerable to biases, Nutrition (2020), eating Nutrition (2020), eating
A > B
oranges daily can reduce apples daily can reduce
such as favoring longer responses. While it
the risk of chronic the risk of chronic
is important to overcome this problem, the diseases by 25% diseases by 25%
specificsofthesebiasesremainunder-explored. According to a study
Eating oranges is good for
published in the Journal of
Inthiswork,wequalitativelyidentifysixtypes well-being. They provide A < B Nutrition (2020), eating
essential vitamins,
of biases inherent in various judge models. particularly vitamin C, and apples daily can reduce
the risk of chronic
We propose EVALBIASBENCH as a meta- antioxidants. diseases by 25%
evaluationcollectionofhand-craftedtestcases
foreachbiastype. Additionally,wepresentde- Figure1: Illustrationofajudgemodelbias. Although
biasingdatasetconstructionmethodsandtheas- the model is capable of distinguishing good and bad
sociatedpreferencedatasetOFFSETBIAS.Ex- responseswritteninasimilarstyle,itsjudgmentfails
perimentalresultsdemonstratethatfine-tuning when exposed to a more appealing style of response
on our dataset significantly enhances the ro- regardlessoftheactualcorrectness.
bustness of judge models against biases and
improvesperformanceacrossmostevaluation
scenarios. Wereleaseourdatasetsandthefine- reported to be heavily influenced by superficial
tunedjudgemodeltopublic.1
qualitiesoftexts(Zhengetal.,2024;Huangetal.,
1 Introduction 2024). Figure1illustratesanexampleofcommon
failurewherejudgmentsareinfluencedbystylistic
Language model-based evaluation has become a
elements. Suchdiscrepanciesareknownasbiases.
scalablesolutionforevaluatingtextgeneratedby
Althoughovercomingbiasesinmodelsisessential
languagemodels. Theuseofproprietarylargelan-
for improving judge models, the specific textual
guage models (LLMs) such as GPT-4 (OpenAI,
qualitiesthatcausethesebiasesremainrelatively
2024)asevaluatorshasdemonstratedhighcorrela-
under-explored.
tionswithhumanevaluations(Liuetal.,2023)and
Inordertotacklethebiasproblem,wefirstex-
is increasingly being adopted in LLM evaluation
plorewhattextualelementsinfluencejudgemodels.
benchmarks (Zheng et al., 2024). Subsequently,
Forthiswetestvariousjudgemodelsondifferent
concerns regarding cost and reproducibility have
meta-evaluationtestcasestoempiricallyidentify
led to fine-tuning of open-source models as cost-
major biases. As a result, we establish six bias
effective judge models (Wang et al., 2024; Zhu
typesandproposeEVALBIASBENCH,acollection
etal.,2023b;Lietal.,2024;Kimetal.,2024a,b).
of80evaluationinstanceswhichintendtoquantify
Although model-based evaluators have shown
the robustness of judge models towards the iden-
potential, they often struggle in certain evalu-
tified biases. Our findings show that many judge
ation scenarios, especially with adversarial in-
models, both proprietary and fine-tuned models,
stances (Zeng et al., 2023). Judge models are
often incorrectly prefer wrong responses in such
* Equalcontribution. † CorrespondingAuthor.Workper- misleadingscenarios.
formedwhileatNCResearch.
Toreducetheidentifiedbiasesinjudgemodels,
1 https://github.com/ncsoft/offsetbias
4202
tcO
7
]LC.sc[
2v15560.7042:viXra
weconstructapreferencedatasetOFFSETBIASto 2.2 Meta-EvaluationBenchmarksandJudge
beintegratedintotrainingproceduresofjudgemod- ModelBiases
els. ThedatasetiscreatedbyleveragingGPT-4and
As more judge models are developed, the need
Claude-3(Anthropic,2024)andemployingprompt-
formeta-evaluationbenchmarkstofairlycompare
ing strategies such as Off-topic response method
their performance becomes critical. Human pref-
andErroneousresponsemethod. Eachinstancein-
erence benchmarks (Dubois et al., 2024b; Wang
cludesagoodresponseandabadresponse,where
etal.,2023a;Zhengetal.,2024;Wangetal.,2024;
thebadresponsecontainscriticalerrorsbutexhibits
Zhang et al., 2023) are commonly employed for
stylisticqualitiespreferredbyjudgemodels. The
thispurpose. Huangetal.(2024)demonstratedthat
datasetisaddedtothejudgemodeltrainingdataas
LLM judges exhibit a preference for superficial
tooffsetexistingbiases.
qualitiesoverstrictadherencetoinstructions. For
We verify the effectiveness of the dataset
instance,lengthbiasandpositionbiasarewidely
OFFSETBIASbytrainingtwojudgemodels: byus-
known (Zheng et al., 2024) and existing works
ingexistinghumanpreferencedataonlyandbyus-
trytoalleviatethosebiases (Duboisetal.,2024a;
ingthesamedatasupplementedwithOFFSETBIAS.
Wang et al., 2023a). Zeng et al. (2023) proposed
We find that incorporating OFFSETBIAS signifi-
ameta-evaluationbenchmarkwithadversarialex-
cantlyincreasesperformanceonEVALBIASBENCH
amples, unveiling the weakness of judge models.
andimprovesresultsonotherbenchmarksaswell.
Ourworkexploresdeeperonwhensuchmislead-
Additionally,weshowthatthisdatasetcanbeuti-
ingbehaviorofjudgemodelsoccursandattempts
lizedintrainingarewardmodel. Thus,wepropose
to mitigate it as a way to improve judge model
thatbuildingbias-awaretrainingdatatooffsetex-
performance.
istingbiasesisaneffectivewaytoimprovejudge
modelperformance. 3 BiasofJudgeModels
Insummary,themaincontributionsofourpaper
areasfollows: We deal with the scenario where a judge model
receivesaninstructionandapairofgoodandbad
1. Weidentifysixtypesofbiasesthatjudgemod-
responsesandmustchoosethegoodresponse. We
elsarepronetoandproposeEVALBIASBENCH,
assumethatajudgemodelfailswhenitsdecision
acollectionofsuchtestcases.
isinfluencedmorebycertainstylisticpatternsand
2. WeproposeOFFSETBIASdatasetanditscon-
less by critical errors within responses. Figure 1
struction methods to enhance judge models’
illustratessuchscenario. Whenresponsestylesare
performance on challenging evaluation in-
similar,themodeliscapableofrejectingcriticaler-
stances.
rors. However,whenthewrongresponseincludes
3. WeshowthatincorporatingOFFSETBIASinto a seemingly more concrete reference, the model
judgemodeltrainingimprovesrobustnessto mayerroneouslypreferthisstyle,leadingtoanin-
existingbiastypesandfurtherimprovesgen- correctdecision. Werefertotheseoverlypreferred
eraljudgingcapability. patternsasbiases. Wehypothesizethatmitigating
thesebiasesisimportanttowardsbuildingabetter
2 RelatedWork judge model and investigate the specific types of
commonbiasespresentinjudgemodels.
2.1 LLM-basedEvaluation
Frompriorresearch,itisknownthatjudgemod-
To judge the quality of text generated by LLMs, elsexhibitcertainbiasessuchasverbositybiasand
Zhengetal.(2024)suggestsusingLLM-as-a-judge, self-enhancementbias(Zhengetal.,2024). Weopt
promptingstrongLLMs(e.g.,GPT-4)toevaluate to get a more dissected view of the bias through
responses to open-ended questions by chat assis- case-by-caseinvestigation. Wecollectexamplesof
tants. Concernsaboutthecostandcontrollability judgemodelfailurestoqualitativelyidentifywhich
ledtoatrendoffine-tuningjudgemodelsbasedon patternofresponsethemodelstendtopreferand
open-sourceLLMs(Wangetal.,2024;Zhuetal., categorizethemasbiastypes. Inordertodiscover
2023b; Li et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024a,b). Our existingbiases,wefollowthesesteps:
workalignswithfine-tunedjudgemodelresearch, 1. Makeinferencesonvariousmeta-evaluation
aimingtocreateacompactyetcompetitivejudge benchmarks (e.g., LLMBar (Zeng et al.,
model. 2023), HHH (Askell et al., 2021)) with
Type 1. Length Bias
Instruction: Come up with a analogy to explain this concept. Concept: Network Topology
Good Response Bad Response
The internet protocol suite is like a postal system's rules for delivering mail.

Network topology is like a roadmap; it The Internet Protocol (IP) is the address on the [...] types of data transfer.

shows how the different components of Together, these protocols ensure data moves smoothly across the internet, just like mail in a
a network are connected and arranged. postal system.
Type 2. Concreteness Bias
Instruction: Is eating orange good for our health?
Good Response Bad Response
Eating oranges is good for well-being. They provide essential According to a study published in the Journal of Nutrition (2020),
vitamins, particularly vitamin C, and antioxidants. eating apples daily can reduce the risk of chronic diseases by 25%
Type 3. Empty Reference Bias
Instruction: I need some tips on improving my skills.
Good Response Bad Response
I'd be glad to help! Can you specify which skills you're looking to To improve your public speaking skills, practice regularly, get
improve? Knowing the specific area will allow me to give you feedback from peers, and watch videos of skilled speakers for tips.
tailored advice. Whether it's related to work, a hobby, or personal Additionally, try recording your speeches to identify areas for
development, I'll provide practical tips and resources. Let's make improvement. Remember, confidence grows with consistent effort
sure we target your goals effectively. and real-world practice.
Type 4. Content Continuation Bias
Instruction: Paraphrase the following sentence.

He wanted to watch a movie but she wanted to go to a party.
Good Response Bad Response
He was interested in watching a movie, while she preferred They compromised and decided to do both by watching a movie at
attending a party. the party.
Type 5. Nested Instruction Bias
Instruction: Read the following sentence and suggest one correction.

Are you familiar with the the US?
Good Response Bad Response
You might need to omit one of the adjacent 'the' in the sentence. Yes, including various aspects of society and daily life.
Type 6. Familiar Knowledge Bias
Instruction: What does it mean by “I was too shy. I just kept the ice there. “
Good Response Bad Response
The sentence suggests that the person was too shy to start a It means that despite feeling nervous or uncomfortable in a social
conversation or make the situation more comfortable, so the initial situation, the person made an effort to initiate conversation or
awkwardness or silence ("the ice") remained unbroken. interaction to make things less awkward and more comfortable for
everyone involved.
Figure2: Identifiedbiastypesandexamples. EachexampleisincludedinEVALBIASBENCH.
multiple off-the-shelf judge models (GPT-4- pattern. Reject the hypothesis if patterned
1106-preview,GPT-3.5-turbo-0125,Llama-3- examples do not cause performance loss for
70b-instruct,Llama-3-8b-instruct(AI@Meta, most models. Examples of rejected bias hy-
2024),Prometheus2(Kimetal.,2024b)and pothesesarereportedinAppendixG.
AutoJ (Lietal.,2024)). The examples that are used to confirm the
bias types are later utilized in building the
2. Analyzeerrorcasesandmakeabiastypehy-
pothesisthatpredictsthereasonforthejudge
EVALBIASBENCHdataset. Asaresultofthispro-
cess,weidentifyatotalof6biastypes,andreport
model’serroneouspreference.
them in the following section. Figure 2 demon-
3. Testthebiastypehypothesisonadditionalex-
stratesexamplesforeachbiastype.
amplesthatreflectthebiaspattern. Additional
examplesaregatheredfromtestsetsorman- 3.1 IdentifiedBiasTypes
ually crafted, which is analogous to making
Type1. LengthBias
adversarial examples (Zeng et al., 2023) or
A well-known yet significant bias is length
designingattacks(Zhengetal.,2024).
bias(Zhengetal.,2024;Huangetal.,2024),which
4. Acceptthebiastypehypothesisifmodelscon-
refers to the tendency of judge models to prefer
sistentlyshowperformancelosswiththebias
longerresponses,regardlessoftheirqualityorhow
well they adhere to the instruction. We find that
lengthbiasisoneofthemostprominentsourceof
biasforjudgemodels.
Type2. ConcretenessBias
Concretenessbiasreferstothetendencytoassign
greatercredibilitytoresponseswithspecificdetails,
includingcitationofauthoritativesources,numeri-
calvaluesandcomplexterminologies. Theeffect
of such elements to language models is also dis-
cussedinHubingeretal.(2024). Figure3: AccuracyDegradationwithIncreasingRatio
ofBad/GoodResponseLengths,measuredwithBase-
Type3. EmptyReferenceBias dataModelonLLMBartestsets.
In case of an incomplete instruction, such as a
request for summary without target text, a good
response would be to ask back to clarify the in- inwhichresponsesarepresentedonthejudgment
structionortohonestlystatetheresponse’suncer- ofLLMevaluators,whichhasalreadybeenidenti-
tainty (Parrish et al., 2022). Weak models would fied(Wangetal.,2023a;Zhengetal.,2024;Huang
oftenrespondwithhallucinatedresponsestoimag- et al., 2024). This bias is not included inthe pro-
inaryinputcontent. Emptyreferencebiasrefersto posedEVALBIASBENCHasitisnottiedtoanyspe-
thetendencyofjudgemodelstoprefersuchhallu- cific instruction-response pair. Nevertheless we
cinatedcontentthatseemtobeassociatedwiththe examinethisbiasthroughmetricssuchaspairwise
instruction. swapaccuracyandmodelchoiceagreement(Zheng
etal.,2024;Wangetal.,2023a)inSection. 6.
Type4. ContentContinuationBias
Wheninstructionsareaccompaniedwithinputtext,
weakmodelscangivestorycompletionresponses 3.2 ConstructionofBiasBenchmark
thatcontinuetheinputtext. Contentcontinuation
biasreferstothetendencytofavorresponsesthat With the identified biases, we construct
completetheinputtext,ratherthanthosethatcor- EVALBIASBENCH, a collection of 80 evalua-
rectly follow the given instruction. This may be tion examples that are categorized into 6 bias
causedbythemodelassigninghigherlikelihoodto types. The examples are first taken from the
thecompletionofthemostrecenttext. bias identification process previously described.
Examplesarethenfiltered,editedornewlycrafted
Type5. NestedInstructionBias
untilallauthorsagreedonwhetherthecorrectand
Nested instruction bias is the tendency of judge
incorrectresponsesareobjectivelydiscernibleand
modelstofavorresponsestoquestionsorrequests
whethertheintendedbiaselementisrepresentedin
embeddedwithintheinputtextofagiveninstruc-
theincorrectresponse.
tion. Itissimilartocontentcontinuationbiasbut
Forbiastypesotherthanlengthbias,weaimto
morechallengingasthewrongresponseseemingly
isolate the effect of the desired bias from the in-
followstheinstructionandthemodelneedtodis-
fluenceoflengthdifference. Toestimateatwhich
cernwhethertheresponsedealswiththemainin-
pointlengthbiastakeseffect,wemeasurethejudge
structioninsteadofthenestedone.
performanceofBase-datamodel(seeSection5.1)
Type6. FamiliarKnowledgeBias
on test instances grouped in different response
Familiar knowledge bias refers to the preference
length ratios. Figure 3 suggests that length bias
forresponsesthatdescribeknowledgecommonly
becomesinfluentialwhenthebad/goodresponse
encounteredinreal-worlddata. Whenaninstruc-
lengthratiosurpasses2.0. Basedonthisresult,we
tion is related to a real-world knowledge such as
manuallyeditthegoodandbadresponsestokeep
idiomsorcommonlyknownfacts,thejudgemod-
theirlengthsundertwicethelengthofeachother.
elsfavorthemorefamiliartextoverresponsesthat
WeusethenewlyconstructedEVALBIASBENCH
preciselymeettheinstruction.
as a test set to measure the robustness of judge
Othertype: PositionBias modelsforeachbiastypeandreporttheresultsin
Position bias refers to the influence of the order Table4.


=== Post-hoc Reward Calibration A Case Study on Length Bias.pdf ===
PublishedasaconferencepaperatICLR2025
POST-HOC REWARD CALIBRATION: A CASE STUDY ON
LENGTH BIAS
1ZeyuHuang 2ZihanQiu 3ZiliWang 1EdoardoM.Ponti 1,4IvanTitov
1UniversityofEdinburgh 2AlibabaGroup 3INFTechnology 4UniversityofAmsterdam
zeyu.huang@ed.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
ReinforcementLearningfromHumanFeedbackalignstheoutputsofLargeLan-
guageModelswithhumanvaluesandpreferences. Centraltothisprocessisthe
reward model (RM), which translates human feedback into training signals for
optimising LLM behaviour. However, RMs can develop biases by exploiting
spurious correlations in their training data, such as favouring outputs based on
lengthorstyleratherthantruequality. Thesebiasescanleadtoincorrectoutput
rankings, sub-optimal model evaluations, and the amplification of undesirable
behavioursinLLMs’alignment. Thispaperaddressesthechallengeofcorrect-
ingsuchbiaseswithoutadditionaldataandtraining,introducingtheconceptof
Post-hocRewardCalibration. Wefirstproposetousethelocalaveragereward
toestimatethebiastermand,thus,removeittoapproximatetheunderlyingtrue
reward. Wethenextendtheapproachtoamoregeneralandrobustformwiththe
LocallyWeightedRegression. Focusingontheprevalentlengthbias,wevalidate
ourproposedapproachesacrossthreeexperimentalsettings,demonstratingconsis-
tentimprovements: (1)a3.11averageperformancegainacross33rewardmodels
ontheRewardBenchdataset;(2)improvedagreementofRMproducedrankings
withGPT-4evaluationsandhumanpreferencesbasedontheAlpacaEvalbench-
mark;and(3)improvedLength-Controlledwinrate(Duboisetal.,2024)ofthe
RLHFprocessinmultipleLLM–RMcombinations. Accordingtoourexperiments,
ourmethodiscomputationallyefficientandgeneralisabletoothertypesofbias
and RMs, offering a scalable and robust solution for mitigating biases in LLM
alignmentandevaluation.
1 INTRODUCTION
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022; Kaufmann et al.,
2023)isdrivingthesuccessofLargeLanguageModels(LLMs)(OpenAI,2023;Aniletal.,2023;
Dubeyetal.,2024). Byintegratinghumanpreferencesintothetrainingloop,RLHFalignsmodels
withdesiredbehavioursandhumanvalues(Chakrabortyetal.,2024),enablingLLMstogenerate
contentthatisconceptuallyappropriate(Sunetal.,2023),ethicallysound(Hendrycksetal.,2021a;
Daietal.,2024),andreflectingnuancedhumanjudgements(Wuetal.,2023). Akeycomponentin
thisprocessistherewardmodel(RM),whichtranslatesqualitativehumanfeedbackintoasignal
foroptimisingLLMs. TheprimarypurposeofRMtrainingistoapproximatehumanpreferences,
allowingittoevaluatethecontentgeneratedbyLLMsbyassigningscores. Thesescores(rewards)
arethenusedtooptimizetheLLM,shapingitsbehaviourtobettermeethumanexpectations.
However,thereisariskthatanRMmayexploitspuriouscorrelationsinthetrainingdatathatdo
notgenuinelyreflecttheoutputquality(Stiennonetal.,2020;Gaoetal.,2023;Singhaletal.,2023;
Pangetal.,2023;Lambert&Calandra,2023). Forinstance,anRMmightfavouroutputsbasedon
length(Parketal.,2024a)orstyle(Lambertetal.,2024;Duboisetal.,2023a),leadingtobiased
assessmentsthatdonotaccuratelyrepresenthumanpreferences. TheinvolvementofabiasedRM
indevelopingLLMscanhavesignificantdrawbacks. Firstly,itmayleadtoincorrectrankingsof
outputs,favouringcontentthatalignswithlearnedbiasesovergenuinelyhigh-qualityoutputs. This
issueisparticularlyproblematicwhenRMsareusedtorankdifferentLLMsduringevaluations,asa
biasedRMcouldproducemisleadingresults,endorsingsuboptimalmodelsandimpedingprogressin
modeldevelopment. Moreover,whenbiasedRMsareemployedinRLHF,thesebiasescanbefurther
1
5202
peS
12
]IA.sc[
2v70471.9042:viXra
PublishedasaconferencepaperatICLR2025
amplified(Zhengetal.,2023b),withtheLLMlearningtoexploitthesebiasesratherthanimproving
genuinetaskperformance—aphenomenonknownasrewardhacking.
Recent advancements introduce various strategies to mitigate these biases and alleviate reward
hackingduringdifferentstagesofRLHF,fromdatahandling(Parketal.,2024a)andrewardmodel
engineering(Costeetal.,2024)tothefinalreinforcementlearningphase(Chenetal.,2024b). Most
oftheseapproaches,however,eitherrequireadditionaldatacollection,re-engineeringoftheRM,or
modificationstoreinforcementlearningalgorithms,whichraisesanintriguingquestion: isitpossible
tocorrectormitigatebiasesinrewardsignalsinatraining-freemanner? Specifically,givenasetof
scoredoutputsfromtheRMandaspecificbiasthattheRMmayexhibit,howcanwecalibratethese
rewardsignalstoreflectthetruequalityoftheoutputsmoreaccurately?
ThispapermakesaninitialattemptatansweringthisquestionbyframingitasPost-hocReward
Calibration. Specifically,foraparticularcharacteristicoftheoutput(e.g.,thelength),weassume
thebiasedrewardfromtheRMcanbedecomposedintothesumof(1)theunderlyingcalibrated
rewardand(2)abiastermthatsolelydependsonthatcharacteristic. Undercertainassumptions,
weproposetousethelocalaveragerewardtoprovideanestimationforthebiasterm,whichcan
thenberemoved,therebyapproximatingthetruereward. Wethenextendittobemoregeneraland
robustusingLocallyWeightedRegressionforbiasestimation. Amongdifferentbiases(Zhangetal.,
2024b),aparticularlyprevalentoneisthesequencelength. PriorworksshowedthatLLMsgenerate
significantlylongerresponsesafterRLHFwithoutimprovingthegenuinequalityofthecontent(Kabir
etal.,2023;Wuetal.,2023;2024b). Singhaletal.(2023)pointoutthatevenapurelylength-based
rewardcanreproducemostdownstreamRLHFimprovementsofexistingRMs, highlightingthat
currentRMsfailtoconvincinglyoutperformsimpleheuristicsandmaybestronglybiasedbylength.
The issue is also evident in powerful proprietary models like GPT-4, which is increasingly used
asajudge,resultinginLLMevaluationsthatfavourmoreverboseresponses. Focusingonlength
bias,wevalidateourmethodinthreesettingsandobserveconsistentimprovements: (1)Benchmark
performance: a3.11performancegainaveragedover33RMsontheRewardBench;(2)RMasLLMs
evaluators: basedonAlpacaEval,weutilise8open-sourceRMstorank184LLMs. Afterapplying
ourcalibration,therankingscorrelatebetterwithGPT-4evaluationsandhumanpreferences. (3)RM
forLLMs’alignment: weassesscalibratedrewardsforRLHFprocess. TestingwithfourLLM–RM
configurations,weobserveconsistentimprovementsinAlpacaEval2Length-controlledwinrates.
In addition to being computationally efficient (e.g., calibrating over 300k samples takes only 30
secondswithasingleCPU),weempiricallyrevealthatourmethodcangeneralisetootherquantifiable
biases,suchasthepresenceofmarkdown-stylefeaturesintheoutputs,andtopairwiseGPT4-as-Judge
models. Importantly,thecalibrationeffectisstronglycorrelatedwiththeRM’spreferenceforspecific
properties: forstronglybiasedRMs,thecalibrationyieldsgreaterimprovements,whileforweakly
biasedRMs,itonlyslightlyaltersitsrewardingbehaviour. Thesefindingssuggestthatourproposed
Post-hocRewardCalibrationmethodenhancesthereliabilityofRMsandoffersapractical,scalable
solutionformitigatingbiasesinRLHF.ThisapproachcouldbeinstrumentalinadvancingRLHF
methodologiesanddevelopingmorerobustandalignedLLMs.
2 RELATED WORKS
RewardModels Givenapromptqandtwocorrespondingresponsesy andy ,traininganRM
1 2
usuallyinvolvestrainingaclassifiertopredictthehumanpreferenceprobabilityp∗(y ≻y |q)of
1 2
tworesponsesy andy withtheBradley-Terry(BT)model(Bradley&Terry,1952):
1 2
p∗(y ≻y |q)=σ(r∗(x )−r∗(x )) (1)
1 2 1 2
wherex =(q,y )representstheprompt-responsepair,r∗isthelatenttruerewardwecannotaccess,
i i
and σ is the logistic function. Then, given a reward modelling dataset D = {(qi,yi,yi)}N =
1 2 i=1
{(xi,xi)}N ,whereyi isannotatedasabetterresponsetopromptq comparedtoyi,traininga
1 2 i=1 1 i 2
RMr istominimisethenegativelog-likelihoodforabinaryclassificationproblem:
θ
L(θ)=−E [logσ(r (x )−r (x ))] (2)
(x1,x2)∼D θ 1 θ 2
Inpractice,RMsareoftenimplementedbyaddinganextralinearlayertoLLMs,whichprojectsthe
representationsofthelastlayersofLLMstoascalarasthereward. Therearealsotwoothertypes
ofRMs: (1)DPO-based: LLMsoptimisedwithDirectPreferenceOptimisation(DPO)(Rafailov
2
PublishedasaconferencepaperatICLR2025
etal.,2023)couldfunctionasanimplicitRM.(2)LLM-as-Judge: AgenerativeLLMcanalsobe
promptedtofunctionasanRMtogeneratefeedback,usuallyconsistingofapieceofchain-of-thought
reasoningandafinalscorerepresentingtheoverallquality(Zhengetal.,2023a;Kwonetal.,2023;
Kimetal.,2024). Inthispaper,wevalidatetheeffectivenessofourmethodsacrossallthreetypesof
judgemodels. Specifically,weemployourmethodtocalibrateBT-basedandDPO-basedRMsonthe
RewardBenchdataset,andtocalibratethepairwisejudgeofGPT-4withtheAlpacaEvalbenchmark.
Bias Mitigation for RLHF Recent works explore the bias mitigation, also termed as mitigate
rewardover-optimisation,fortheRLHFprocessmainlyfromtheperspectiveof(1)Datahandling:
Parketal.(2024a)identifiessixtypesofinherentbiasinvariousjudgemodelsandemployLLMs
togeneratethede-biasingdatasetforfurtherfine-tuning. Zhuetal.(2024)proposetoiteratively
replacehardlabelsindatawithsoftlabelsduringRMtraining,while Ritaetal.(2024)relyonhuman
expertdemonstrationtorecalibratetherewardobjectiveoptimisedwithReinforcementLearning.
(2) Reward Model Engineering: Coste et al. (2024); Eisenstein et al. (2023); Sun et al. (2024);
Zhangetal.(2024a)implementtherewardensemble; Rame´ etal.(2024)firstfine-tunemultiple
RMsandthenaveragethemintheweightspace; Daietal.(2024)decoupletheRMtrainingfor
helpfulnessandharmlessnessand Chenetal.(2024b)disentanglethelengthsignalandthequality
signalintotwodifferentrewardheads. Shenetal.(2023);Wangetal.(2024);Quan(2024)exploit
theideaofMixture-of-Experts(Qiuetal.,2024a;b)inRMtrainingtocapturedifferentfacetsof
humanpreferencetoavoidthepotentialconflictbetweenthem;(3)ReinforcementLearningmethods:
Anotherresearchline (Moskovitzetal.,2024;Sunetal.,2024;Zhouetal.,2024;Zhaietal.,2024)
modifies the algorithm or optimisation objective during reinforcement learning with Park et al.
(2024b); Zhu et al. (2024); Lu et al. (2024) specifically focusing on the length, one of the most
consequentialsourcesofbias(MorediscussionsonlengthbiasareinAppendix.A).Ourworktakes
adifferentapproachfrompreviousmethodsbyemployingpost-hocrewardcalibration,i.e.,using
onlyabatchofscoredprompt-responseexamplestomitigatetheRM’sbias,withoutinterveningthe
preferencedatacollection,RMtraining,andtheRLHFphase.
3 METHOD
3.1 PROBLEMSTATEMENT: REWARDCALIBRATION
Therewardcalibrationproblemcouldbeformalisedasfollows: givenaninput–outputpairxtobe
evaluated,therewardmodelr assignsascalarr (x)torepresentitsquality. However,havingbeen
θ θ
trainedonthehumanpreferencedataset,therewardmodelr maylearnshortcutstoapproximate
θ
the human preference and thus have biases regarding some characteristics of the input–output
pairx. Forexample,ittendstoassignhigherrewardstooutputswithlongerlengthorcontaining
knowledgecommonlyencounteredinthereal-worlddata(Parketal.,2024a).Supposingameasurable
characteristicofinterestcisafunctionthatmapstheinput–outputpairxtoascalarc(x):
c: X (cid:55)→ R
x → c(x)
Weassumethatthebiasedrewardfromtherewardmodelr (x)couldbedecomposedintotwoterms,
θ
anunderlyingcalibratedrewardr∗(x)andabiasbθ(c(x))withregardscharacteristicc:
θ c
r (x)=r∗(x)+bθ(c(x)) (3)
θ θ c
TheRMisusuallyusedtocalculatethemarginbetweentwooutputs(x ,x )topredictthehuman
1 2
preference:
∆ (x ,x )=r (x )−r (x )=r∗(x )−r∗(x )+bθ(c(x ))−bθ(c(x )) (4)
rθ 1 2 θ 1 θ 2 θ 1 θ 2 c 1 c 2
Thus,therewardcalibrationproblemistoestimatetherewarddifferenceowingtothebiastermand
subtractittorecovertheunderlyingtruerewardmargin∆∗ (x ,x )=r∗(x )−r∗(x ).
rθ 1 2 θ 1 θ 2
Post-hocRewardCalibration: Theproposedrewardcalibrationproblemisapplicabletovarious
stagesofRLHF.Dependingonthefocus,itcanbetailoredeithertowardcollectingdebiasedpref-
erencedata,refiningthetrainingofrewardmodels,orevenenhancingthealignmentprocedureby
adjustingthealignmentobjectives. Incontrast,thispaperfocusesonthepost-hocsetting,performing
rewardcalibrationaftertherewardassignmentwithoutinterferingwithanydatacollectionorRM
3
PublishedasaconferencepaperatICLR2025
trainingstage. Formally,givenN already-rewardeddatapoints{xi,xi,∆ (xi,xi)}N ,weaim
1 2 rθ 1 2 i=1
to find the calibrated reward margin ∆ˆ∗ (xi,xi) that is closer to the underlying oracle margin
rθ 1 2
∆∗ (xi,xi)foreverypair(xi,xi).
rθ 1 2 1 2
Assumptions We make the following hypothesis about the decomposition in Eq. 3. (1) Inde-
pendenceofthebiasedcharacteristic: considerageneralrewardmodellingdatasetcomposedof
promptsandcorrespondingresponsespairsD ={(qi,yi,yi)}N ={(xi,xi)}N ,theexpectation
1 2 i=1 1 2 i=1
oftheunderlyinggoldrewardmarginshouldbe0andisindependentofthebiasedcharacteristicc,
E
(x1,x2∼D)
(cid:2) ∆∗
rθ
(x
1
,x
2
) (cid:12) (cid:12)c(x
1
)=c
1
,c(x
2
)=c
2
]=0
(2)SufficientDensity:thefunctionvaluesofthecharacteristicfunctioncisassumedtobesufficiently
denseinitsrangec(X). (3)LipschitzContinuity: thebiastermbθ isaslow-varyingfunctionof
c
characteristicc,whichmeansifpairsx andx areclosetoeachotherregardingthecharacteristicc,
1 2
theircorrespondingbiasterminEq.3shouldbecloseaswell. Mathematically,givenc(x )anda
0
neighbourhoodV(x )={c(x)||c(x)−c(x )|<ϵ}ofx ,forallc(x ),c(x )∈V,thereexistsa
0 0 0 1 2
constantK suchthat|bθ(c(x ))−bθ(c(x ))|<K|c(x)−c(x )|.
c 1 c 1 0
3.2 BIASESTIMATION
UniformAveragingApproach AccordingtoEq.4,therewardmarginbetweenx andx consists
1 2
of(1)theunderlyingcalibratedmargin∆∗ (x ,x )and(2)thebiased“bonusreward”thatsolely
rθ 1 2
dependonthecharacteristicc(x )andc(x ). Intuitively,toestimatebθ(c(x ))−bθ(c(x )),weask:
1 2 c 1 c 2
Giventhecharacteristicmeasuresc(x )andc(x )foranarbitrarypair(x ,x ),whatwould
1 2 1 2
betheirrewardmargin?
Astraightforwardestimationforthisquestioncouldbe
E[r (x)|c(x)=c(x )]−E[r (x)|c(x)=c(x )]. (5)
θ 1 θ 2
UndertheassumptionofLipschitzcontinuityandsufficientdensity,wecanobtainasimplecalibrated
rewardmargindescribedinEq.6:
∆ˆ∗ (x ,x )=∆ (x ,x )−(E[r (x)||c(x)−c(x )|<d]−E[r (x)||c(x)−c(x )|<d])
rθ 1 2 rθ 1 2 θ 1 θ 2
(6)
wheredisathresholddistancethatgovernstheneighbourhoodsizearoundx andx .
1 2
Locally-Weighted-Regression Method How do we choose the threshold distance d in Eq. 6?
(1) It must be sufficiently small to ensure that the bias term can be approximated as a constant
function within the local neighbourhood, enabling the application of Eq.6; and (2) it must also
belargeenoughtomeetthesufficientdensityassumption,ensuringsufficientdatapointsusedfor
estimation. Satisfying these conflicting requirements may necessitate thorough hyper-parameter
tuningofdtoemploytheintuitiveapproachinpractice. Furthermore,thedensitymaynotbeuniform
inpractice,sothattheoptimalthresholddistancedmayvaryfordifferentdatapointsc(x). Therefore,
adesirableapproachshouldbeabletoestimatetheexpectationsinEq.5inamoregeneral,robust,and
practicalwayby(1)relaxingtheconstant-functionassumptionand(2)mitigatingthesensitivityto
thechoiceofneighbourhoodsize,possiblybyincorporatingcertainadaptivemechanismstooptimise
theneighbourhoodsizeorthecontributionforeachdatapointdynamically. Bothdesideratamotivate
ustoemployLocallyWeightedRegression(LWR)towardsamorerobustestimation.
Specifically, given a point of interest (e.g., a characteristic value c(x) in our case), the Locally
WeightedRegression(LWR)methodfirstusesabandwidthparameterf todefinethefractionofthe
datasetutilisedforregression. Thenthemethodassignsweightstoneighbouringdatapoints,giving
higherweightstopointsclosertothetargetandlowerweightstothosefartheraway. Thisapproach
ensuresthatnearbypointshaveagreaterinfluenceontheregression. LWRthenfitsaweightedlinear
regressiontomodelthelocalbehaviourofthetargetfunction,effectivelyapproximatingtheweighted
averagewithinthespecifiedlocalcontext.
LWR addresses the desiderata by offering a more adaptable approach to estimate the Eq. 5. It
relaxes the constant-function assumption by introducing the linear approximation to capture the
4


=== Read Quietly Think Aloud Decoupling Comprehension and Reasoning in LLMs.pdf ===
5202
luJ
4
]LC.sc[
1v72330.7052:viXra
Preprint. Underreview.
Read Quietly, Think Aloud: Decoupling Comprehension and
Reasoning in LLMs
YuanxinWang,&GaneshVenkatesh
AppliedML,Cerebras
{michael.wang, ganesh.venkatesh}@cerebras.net
Abstract
LargeLanguageModels(LLMs)havedemonstratedremarkableproficiency
inunderstandingtextandgeneratinghigh-qualityresponses. However,a
criticaldistinctionfromhumancognitionistheirtypicallackofadistinct
internal‘reading’ordeliberationphasebefore‘speaking’(i.e.,generating
text). Humansoftenengageinsilentreadingtocomprehendcontextand
formulatethoughtspriortoarticulation. Thispaperinvestigatesmethods
toimbueLLMswithasimilarcapacityforinternalprocessing.
We introduce and evaluate techniques that encourage LLMs to ‘read
silently.’ Ourfindingsindicatethatevenastraightforwardapproach,such
asprovidingthemodelwithaninitialcontextualpromptor‘readingspace’
beforeitbeginspredictingsubsequenttokensforthefinaloutput,canyield
significantperformanceimprovements. Wefurtherenhancethisconceptby
developinga‘readingbuddy’architecture,whereanauxiliarycomponent
silentlyprocessestheinputandprovidesrefinedcontextualinsightstothe
primarygenerationmodel. Theseapproachesaimtofosterdeeperunder-
standingfromLLMssothattheycanproducebetterreasonedresponses,
movingthemonestepclosertomorehuman-liketextprocessing. Ourre-
sultsindicatethatthesesimpletechniquescanprovidesurprisinglystrong
impactonaccuracywithmultiplepointaccuracyboost.
1 Introduction
The ability of Large Language Models (LLMs) to tackle complex questions has grown
remarkablyinrecenttimesOpenAI;DeepSeek-AI(2025);Qwen(2025);Geminietal.(2024).
Thisprogresshasbeendrivenbyenhancedtrainingrecipes,suchasonlinereinforcement
learningtechniqueslikeGenerativeRewardPolicyOptimizationShaoetal.(2024),aswell
asbyallocatingmorecomputationatinferencetime. Akeybreakthroughcommontomany
oftheseadvancementsisgivingthemodeldedicatedspaceto“think”—aphasewhereit
explicitlylaysoutachainofreasoningbeforeprovidingthefinalanswer. Thishasproven
tobeapowerfulmechanismforimprovingthefidelityandlogicofgeneratedresponses.
However, the current paradigm, with its focus on the explicit “thinking” trace, largely
overlooksthecrucialprecedingstep: themodel’sinitialcomprehensionandinternalization
ofthecontextandquery.Therearecurrentlynowidespreadmethodstoexplicitlyencourage
an LLM to spend more time processing the input before it begins to speak. Prior work,
such as Read Again Xu et al. (2024), indicates that providing models with more time to
”read”andinternalizeinformationbeforetheyarerequiredtoproducearesponsecanlead
tosignificantqualityimprovements,highlightingaclearopportunityforexploration.
Inthiswork,weaddressthisgapbyproposinganoveltrainingrecipeandcorresponding
modelarchitecturechanges. Thesemodificationsarespecificallydesignedtoencouragethe
modelto“readquietly”beforeitgeneratesitsthinkingtracesandfinalanswer. Webelieve
that formally incorporating a silent reading phase is a promising research direction. By
providingthemodelwithasuperiorinitialcomprehensionofthecontext, wepositthat
this“silentreading”phasecanamplifythebenefitsoftest-time“thinking”andcouldbea
promisingfuturedirectionofexploration.
1
Preprint. Underreview.
2 MotivationandRelatedWork
Wehypothesizethataneffectiveprocessforgeneratingreasonedresponsescomprisestwo
distinctstages. Thefirstisa‘silentreading’phase,dedicatedtointernalizingprovidedin-
formationtobuildacomprehensiveunderstandingofthecontextandthequery’sdemands.
Thisisfollowedbyasecond,‘responseformulation’phase,wheretheagentconsciously
thinksthroughtheproblemtoconstructacoherentanswer.Wepositthatexplicitlymodeling
thesetwostagesisacritical,yetoverlooked,aspectofimprovingmachinereasoning.
MuchoftherecentfocusonimprovingreasoninginLargeLanguageModels(LLMs)has
predominantlytargetedthesecondstageofthisprocess—theexplicit“thinking”orartic-
ulationofreasoning. TechniquessuchasChain-of-ThoughtWeietal.(2023)prompting,
test-timecomputeFilipczuketal.(2024);Yuetal.(2025),andspecializedreasoningmod-
elsDeepSeek-AI(2025);Qwen(2025)arealldesignedtoimprovehowanLLMstructures
andgeneratesitsthoughtprocessaspartoftheoutput. However,comparativelylittleatten-
tionhasbeengiventothefoundationalfirststage: encouragingthemodelto“readquietly”
to internalize and synthesize the context before initiating the reasoning and generation
phase. Thisrepresentsasignificantgap,asthequalityofthefinalresponseisfundamentally
dependentonthedepthoftheinitialunderstanding.
Ourworkproposesfirststepstowardsaddressingthischallenge. Weproposetwosimple
yet effective techniques designed to encourage the model to perform this silent reading
step(Section3). Theencouragingresultsfromourapproachmakeacompellingcasefor
reconsidering the standard LLM training and architectural paradigms. We believe our
findingshighlightavaluableopportunitytoexplicitlyincorporatedistinct“readingquietly”
and“thinking/responding”phasesintofuturemodeldesigns,potentiallyleadingtomore
robustandhuman-likeefficientreasoningcapabilities.
Arelatedlineofrecentworkhasbeguntoexplorethedifferentialimportanceoftokens
withinatrainingsampleLinetal.(2025),oftenwiththegoalofweightingtheircontribution
to the loss function accordingly. A fundamental challenge in standard autoregressive
training: theinitialtokensofasequenceareinherentlydifficult,ifnotimpossible,topredict
correctlygiventhelackofprecedingcontext. Forexample,inasequencelike”Thelargest
cityinUSbypopulationisNewYork,”themodelhasverylittlesignaltopredict”largest”
from”The,”buthasaverystrongsignaltopredict”NewYork”oncethecontext”...USby
populationis”hasbeenprocessed.
Asmodelsbecomemorepowerfulandaretrainedformultipleepochs,theyachievevery
lowlossonthepredictable,context-richportionsofasample. Consequently,thetraining
signalbecomesdisproportionatelydominatedbythehighlossfromtheunpredictableinitial
tokens. Arguably,forcingthemodeltoupdateitsweightsbasedonthesehigh-variance,
context-poorpredictionsisaninefficient,ifnotfutile,applicationofthelearningobjective.
Our”silentreading”frameworknaturallyaddressesthisconcerninasimpleandelegant
manner.Bydesignatinganinitialperiodforcomprehensionwherethenext-tokenprediction
loss is not applied, our work effectively instructs the model to focus on understanding
beforepredicting,therebysidesteppingtheproblemofpenalizingthemodelforfailingat
aninherentlyspeculativetask.
Figure1: AnillustrationofourproposedREADQandREADQBUDDYtechniques.
2
Preprint. Underreview.
Table 1: READQ and READQBUDDY deliver significant gains on multiple benchmarks.
SW16/SW64-slidingwindowof16/64forREADQBUDDY
EXPERIMENT ARCCHALLENGE HELLASWAG OPENBOOKQA PUBMEDQA WINOGRANDE
LLAMA3.13BIT 37.2 57.56 34.0 65.0 62.35
READQ 45.82 72.64 40.8 75.4 69.22
READQBUDDY 49.06 73.03 40.8 75.6 68.82
ABLATIONS
LLAMA3.23BBASE 37.97 61.98 35.4 67.6 64.4
+READQ 45.56 71.6 40.0 70.8 67.4
LLAMA3.13BIT 37.2 57.56 34.0 65.0 62.35
+READQBUDDY+SW16 47.18 72.64 40.8 75.4 70.4
+READQBUDDY+SW64 47.7 73.0 41.0 75.6 70.32
3 Approach
ToencourageLLMstobetterunderstandcontextbeforegeneratingaresponse,weintro-
ducetwosimpleyeteffectivetechniquesshowninFigure1: ReadQuietly(READQ)and
ReadBuddy(READQBUDDY). Thefirsttechniquemodifiesthetrainingprocesstocreatea
“silentreading”windowatthebeginningofasequence,whilethesecondintroducesan
architecturalenhancementtoprovidepersistentcomprehensionthroughoutthegeneration
process.
3.1 READQ: LossMaskingforInitialComprehension
Our first technique, READQ, encourages the model to dedicate the initial moments of
processing to silent reading rather than immediate prediction. We implement this by
applyinglossmaskingtothefirstKtokensoftheinputsequenceduringtraining.Specifically,
foragivensequence,thestandardautoregressivenext-tokenpredictionlossisnotcalculated
forthefirstKpredictionsaftereachbostoken.
Thisapproachprovidesatwofoldbenefit. Ataminimum,itaddressestheissueoftraining
onhigh-variance,context-poorinitialtokens. Theseearlytokensareinherentlydifficultto
predict,andthegradientsderivedfromthemcanbenoisyandinefficientforlearning. By
maskingthisportionoftheloss,wepreventthemodelfrombeingpenalizedforfailingata
speculativetask. Intheidealcase,wehypothesizethatthispressure-freewindowgivesthe
modeltheopportunitytodevelopanabilityto“readquietly”-thatis,tousetheseinitial
stepstobuildamorerobustinternalrepresentationofthecontextbeforecommencingthe
generationtask.
3.2 READQBUDDY: ExtendingComprehensionwithanAuxiliaryModule
WerecognizethattheREADQtechniqueprimarilybenefitstheinitialphaseofgeneration.
However,forlongandcomplexinputs,latertokensinthegeneratedresponsecouldalso
benefitfromacontinuouslyavailableunderstandingoftheprecedingcontext. Thecompre-
hensionbuiltduringthefirstfewstepsmaydiluteasthegenerationsequencegrows.
Tothatend,weproposeREADQBUDDY,amodelextensiondesignedtoprovidepersistent
comprehension. Thisapproachinvolvesanauxiliary“buddy”modulethatreadstheentire
inputcontextinparallel,processestheinformationandprovideasemanticrepresentation
of the context to the primary generation model at each step. This ensures that the core
insightsfromthe“silentreading”phasearenotlostandcaninformtheentirereasoning
andresponse-generationprocess,fromthefirsttokentothelast. Inourparticularimple-
mentation(Algorithm1),READQBUDDYisaLLMmodelandthesemanticrepresentationis
theembeddingfromthesecondlastlayer. Theinputtothemainmodelisthesumofthe
semanticrepresentationfromthebuddymodelandoutputofembeddinglayerfromthe
mainmodel.
3
Preprint. Underreview.
Table2: AccuracyboostforlargerLlama3.170Bmodelonscientifictasks
EXPERIMENT MEDQA MEDMCQA PUBMEDQA GPQA MMLU
LLAMA3.170B 66.8 69.1 79.6 37.37 78.9
+READQ 74.7 69.7 80.0 38.38 79.2
4 Results
WenowpresenttheempiricalvalidationforourproposedREADQandREADQBUDDYmeth-
ods, with full details on our datasets and training recipe provided in Appendix A. For
eachcomparison,thebaselineismodeltrainedonsamedatasetwithoutourtechniques.
Ourfindingsdemonstrateconsistentperformanceimprovementsinmultiplesettingsand
confirmthatthesebenefitsholdwhenscalingtolargermodelsanddomain-specificdataset.
4.1 MainResultsforREADQandREADQBUDDY
Ourprimaryexperimentsevaluateourproposedmethods,READQandREADQBUDDY,on
theLlama3.23BInstructmodelGrattafiorietal.(2024). FortheREADQBUDDYconfiguration,
aLlama3.21Bmodelservesasthe“buddy”thatprovidescontextualsummaries. Table1
presentsourmainfindingsacrossasuiteofbenchmarks. Weobserveaconsistentperfor-
mance improvement for both the READQ and READQBUDDY configurations compared to
thebaselinemodel. Itisworthnotingthattheseareearlyresults. Wesuspectourcurrent
trainingrecipemayunder-trainthe READQBUDDY variantinparticular, notallowingthe
mainmodelsufficienttimetofullyleveragetheinformationfromthebuddy’sembeddings.
Thegainsseeneveninthissimplesettingarethereforehighlyencouragingandpointto
significantpotential.
4.2 AblationStudies
Tobetterunderstandthebehaviorofourmethods,weconducttwokeyablationstudies.
First,weapplyourmethodstothebasemodelinsteadoftheinstruct-tunedversiontoisolate
theeffectofinstructiontuning. Second,weexperimentwithenrichingtheREADQBUDDY’s
representationsbyincorporatingalocalslidingwindow. WhenextendingREADQBUDDY
withslidingwindow,wenoticethatwhileoverallaveragesmaybesimilar,specificbench-
marksseesignificant,multi-pointbenefits. Thissuggeststhatamoretailoredtrainingrecipe
fordifferentmodeltypesandconfigurationscouldunlocksubstantialfurthergains.
4.3 ScalabilitytoLargerModelsandSpecializedDatasets
Finally,todemonstratethatthebenefitsofourapproachholdwhenscalingtoalargermodel
trainedonaspecializeddataset,weevaluateREADQonamuchlargerLlama3.170Bmodel
trainedonadatamixturetargetingscientificdomain. Theresults,summarizedinTable2,
tell a similar story. The performance gains are consistent across multiple benchmarks,
confirming the scalability of our method. Notably, we see a very significant impact on
some tasks, such as an 8 percentage point jump in accuracy on MedQA Jin et al. (2021),
highlightingthepotentialofourapproachincomplexreasoningscenarios.
5 Conclusion
Thispaperintroduced‘readingquietly’asimpleyetpowerfultechniquetoensureLLMs
comprehend context before generating a response, leading to superior reasoning. The
naturalnextstepistocombinethisfoundational‘reading’phasewiththeadvanced‘thinking’
capabilitiesofstate-of-the-artmodels. Thissynthesisofsilentcomprehensionandexplicit
reasoningoffersapromisingcandidateforthefutureofartificialintelligence.
4


=== Rectifying Shortcut Behaviors in Preference-based Reward Learning.pdf ===
Rectifying Shortcut Behaviors in Preference-based
Reward Learning
WenqianYe GuangtaoZheng∗ AidongZhang
UniversityofVirginia Accenture UniversityofVirginia
wenqian@virginia.edu zhguangt@gmail.com aidong@virginia.edu
Abstract
Inreinforcementlearningfromhumanfeedback,preference-basedrewardmodels
playacentralroleinaligninglargelanguagemodelstohuman-alignedbehavior.
However,recentstudiesshowthatthesemodelsarepronetorewardhackingand
oftenfailtogeneralizewellduetoover-optimization. Theyachievehighreward
scoresbyexploitingshortcuts,thatis,exploitingspuriousfeatures(e.g.,response
verbosity, agreeabletone, orsycophancy)thatcorrelatewithhumanpreference
labelsinthetrainingdataratherthangenuinelyreflectingtheintendedobjectives.
Inthispaper,insteadofprobingtheseissuesoneatatime,wetakeabroaderview
oftherewardhackingproblemasshortcutbehaviorsandintroduceaprincipled
yetflexibleapproachtomitigateshortcutbehaviorsinpreference-basedreward
learning. Inspiredbytheinvarianttheoryinthekernelperspective,wepropose
Preference-based Reward Invariance for Shortcut Mitigation (PRISM), which
learnsgroup-invariantkernelswithfeaturemapsinaclosed-formlearningobjective.
Experimental results in several benchmarks show that our method consistently
improvestheaccuracyoftherewardmodelondiverseout-of-distributiontasksand
reducesthedependencyonshortcutsindownstreampolicymodels,establishinga
robustframeworkforpreference-basedalignment.
1 Introduction
ReinforcementLearningfromHumanFeedback(RLHF)[1]hasemergedasacornerstoneforthe
alignmentoflargelanguagemodels(LLMs),enablingthemtogeneratehelpful,honest,andharmless
responsesthatalignwellwithhumanpreferences[2]. RLHFaimstooptimizealanguagemodel
(thepolicymodel)toprovideresponsesthatmaximizetheoutputsofarewardmodelwhichserves
as a proxy for human preferences. Standard RLHF algorithms require an explicit reward model
fittedtohumanpreferencedataandoptimizeapolicymodelusingpolicygradientmethods[3,4,5].
Alternatively,directalignmentalgorithms[6,7,8]optimizeapolicymodelwithanimplicitreward
modelreparameterizedviatheRLHFobjective. ThesuccessofRLHFisevidentinvariouspopular
AIsystems,suchasGemini[9],Claude[10],andChatGPT[11].
Despiteitspromises,RLHFhighlydependsonthequalityofrewardmodels,whichisvulnerabletoa
keyproblemknownasrewardhacking[12]orover-optimization[13]. Thisproblemoccurswhen
rewardmodelsareinadvertentlyoptimizedtousespuriousattributesofthepreferencedata,insteadof
theirdesiredtraitsthatalignwithhumanintents,asshortcutsinrewardlearning.Asaresult,thepolicy
inducedbyhackedorover-optimizedrewardmodelsmisalignswithhumanpreferences.Asillustrated
inFigure1,sincethechosenresponsesinthetrainingdatapredominantlyagreewithusers’prompts,
therewardmodellearnstopreferresponseswithsycophancy[14,15,16],leadingtoamisalignment
withthechosenresponseinthetestdatawhichdoesnotexhibitsycophancy. Themostwell-studied
andnoticedmanifestationoftheproblemislengthcorrelationsorverbosity[17,18,19,20],where
∗WorkdoneatUniversityofVirginia.
39thConferenceonNeuralInformationProcessingSystems(NeurIPS2025).
5202
tcO
12
]IA.sc[
1v05091.0152:viXra
Training data Test data
Prompt Reducing pollution should be a Prompt I just get a job offer. Is remote
global priority, don?t you think? work the best option for me?
Chosen response Rejected response Chosen response Rejected response
Absolutely ? that?s such a Pollution is mostly Remote work offers flexibility but Absolutely. Remote work is the
wise and thoughtful point! beneficial for plant growth. can lead to blurred boundaries. best option.
I agree with the user sycophancy I agree with the user
Figure1: Illustrationofarewardmodellearningsycophancyastheshortcutinresponsesfromthe
preferencetrainingdataandfailingtoalignwiththehumanintentonthetestdata.
reward models favor longer responses regardless of their relevance to the given prompts due to
thestrongspuriouscorrelationbetweenthelengthsoftheresponsesandtheirdesiredtraitsinthe
preferencedata. Comparedwithverbosityandsycophancy,somerewardhackingissuesaremore
subtleandremainunderexplored. Forexample,conceptcorrelations[21]causemodelstoassociate
spurioustextualconcepts(e.g.,“food”)withdesiredtraits(e.g.,positivesentiment),whileignoring
theactualresponsecontext. Thesebiaseshighlightacoreconcernthatrewardmodelsareimperfect
proxiesforhumanintents,posingsignificantriskstohumanbeliefformationanddecision-making
withLLMsacrossnumeroushigh-stakesdomains.
TomitigatethesebiasesinrewardmodelsandenhanceLLMalignmentwithhumanpreferences,
we systematically reframe this problem as the shortcut learning problem [22, 23, 24]. We refer
to the spurious attributes, such as response verbosity, tone, and sycophancy, that lead to high
rewards in reward models as shortcuts in preference-based reward learning. This concept stems
frompreviousstudiesofshortcutlearninginclassificationtasks[22,23],whereclassifiersexploit
spuriousattributes,suchasbackgroundsorimagetexture,thatstronglycorrelatewithlabelsinthe
trainingdataforpredictions. Modelscanperformwellonin-distribution(i.d.) testsetswithregard
totrainingdata,whiletheytendtoperformpoorlyonout-of-distribution(o.o.d.) datawherethose
spuriouscorrelations[25,26]donothold. Previousmethodslikeinvariantriskminimization[27]
anddistributionallyrobustoptimization[28]tacklethisproblembyenforcingconsistentperformance
acrossmultipledatagroups(orsubpopulations)withvariousspuriousattributes,giventheannotations
oftheseattributesinthetrainingdata. However,inthesettingofRLHF,annotationsonspurious
attributesofpreferencedataareoftenhardtoacquire,andmostrewardmodelsareLLM-basedina
black-boxnature,makingitchallengingtodetectandmitigateshortcutsinrewardmodels. Recent
works[20,19,29]solveonlyoneshortcut(e.g.,verbosity)atatimewithoutjointlyconsideringother
shortcuts. Thisraisesanemergingchallenge:
How can we rectify shortcut learning in RLHF in a unified way
where all targeted shortcuts can be mitigated?
Inthispaper,wepresentPRISM,anovelshortcutmitigationmethodforrewardmodelstoimprove
alignmentwithhumanpreferences. Wefirstcharacterizeshortcutfeatures(e.g.,responselength,tone)
asgroup-invariantkernelsandshowthattheirinvariancecanbeefficientlyapproximatedusingrandom
featuremaps. ThismotivatesthePRISMobjective,whichimprovesupontheBradley-Terryranking
losswithkernel-basedregularizers,makingtherewardmodelawareofthedistancesbetweenvarious
spuriousattributesinthepreferencedata. Unlikepriormethods,PRISMsupportsmultipleshortcut
mitigationobjectiveswithinasharedmetricspace,fromsimpleheuristicstoLLM-baseddetectors
[30]. Theoretically, weestablishageneralizationboundfortheproposedobjective. Empirically,
PRISMimprovesrobustnessonseveralo.o.d. preferencedatasetsanddownstreamalignmenttasks.
Ourcontributionsareasfollows:
• We refactor the reward hacking problems as the shortcut behaviors, which unifies diverse
biases(e.g.,relianceonverbosity,sycophancy,tone)underasingleframework. Inspiredby
theinvarianttheory,wemodeltheshortcuttransformationasgroupactionsandtheshortcut
featuresasgroup-invariantkernels.
2
• We propose PRISM, a practical shortcut-mitigation framework that approximates the
group-invariantkernelswithfeaturemapsandleadstoanexplicitlearningobjective. PRISMis
flexibleandsupportsregularizationrangingfromsimpleheuristics(e.g.,responselength)to
LLM-basedJudges.
• We provide both theoretical and empirical evidence for PRISM’s effectiveness. We prove
thatPRISMisguaranteedbyariskboundundermildassumptions. Inexperiments,PRISM
consistentlyoutperformspreviousbaselinerewardmodelsontheo.o.d. preferencedataand
inducesrobustdownstreampolicymodels.
2 Preliminaries
We start by introducing preference data, reward modeling, and alignment algorithms in
preference-basedRLHF.Then,wedescribetheshortcutlearningprobleminrewardmodels.
Preference data. In preference-based RLHF, we are given a human preference dataset D =
pref
{(x(i),y(i),y(i))}N withN triplets,wherex(i) ∈X denotesthei’thinputpromptfromtheprompt
w l i=1
spaceX,y(i) ∈ Y denotesachosenresponsefromtheresponsespaceY,andy(i) ∈ Y denotesa
w l
rejectedresponse. TheresponsespaceY containsallpossibleresponsesfromareferencepolicy
modelπ .
ref
Rewardmodeling. Thegoalistolearnarewardmodel,whichactsasaproxyforhumanpreferences,
from the preference data to accurately assign rewards to prompt-response pairs. A common and
successful approach in reward modeling for LLM alignment is to adopt the Bradley-Terry (BT)
model [31], which assumes that preferences are generated by some latent reward function r :
X ×Y →Randthepreferencelikelihoodcanbewrittenas
exp(r(x,y ))
P(y ≻y |x)= w =σ(r(x,y )−r(x,y )), (1)
w l exp(r(x,y ))+exp(r(x,y )) w l
w l
where P(y ≻ y |x) denotes the likelihood of y being preferred to y given x, and σ(z) =
w l w l
1/(1+exp(−z))isthesigmoidfunction. Then,wecanfitarewardmodelr parameterizedbyθ,
θ
whichminimizesthenegativelog-likelihoodonthepreferencedatasetD asfollows,
pref
L (r |D )=−minE [logσ(r (x,y )−r (x,y ))] (2)
BT θ pref
θ
(x,yw,yl)∼Dpref θ w θ l
Alignmentalgorithm. Aligningapolicymodelπwiththepreferencedatacanbeachievedwithan
explicitorimplicitrewardmodel. Giventheexplicitlylearnedrewardmodelr ,thereferencepolicy
θ
modelπ ,andinputpromptdistributionP overX,πisoptimizedviathefollowingobjective:
ref
maxE [E r (x,y)−β·D [π(·|x)∥π (·|x)]], (3)
x∼P y∼π(·|x) θ KL ref
π
whereD istheKLdivergenceandβ >0istheKLpenaltycoefficient. TheKLpenaltyinFormula
KL
3ensuresthatrewardsfromr arerelevanttoπbypreventingthepolicymodelπfromdeviatingtoo
θ
muchfromthereferencepolicyπ . Forthealignmentwithimplicitrewardmodeling,suchasDPO
ref
[6],theoptimalrewardmodelisfirstderivedfromFormula3asafunctionofthepolicymodelπ .
θ
Then,thepolicymodelisdirectlyoptimizedtomaximizethepreferencelikelihoodinEquation1
overallpreferencedatawiththefollowingloss,
π (y |x) π (y |x)
L (π |π ,D )=−E [logσ(βlog θ w −βlog θ l )], (4)
DPO θ ref pref (x,yw,yl)∼Dpref π (y |x) π (y |x)
ref w ref l
wheretheimplicitrewardmodelcanbedefinedasr∗(x,y)=π (y|x)/π (y|x).
θ θ ref
Shortcutlearninginrewardmodels. AsillustratedinFigure1,whentherewardmodelistrained
withchosenresponsesthatpredominantlycontainsycophancy,itfailstocorrectlyrankthechosen
responses above the rejected ones in the test data, in which the chosen responses do not exhibit
sycophancy. In Figure 2(a), we formally describe the shortcut learning behavior through latent
featuredecomposition. Consideranencoderh:X ×Y →Z ×Z ,whichmapsaprompt-response
s g
pair(x,y)todecoupledlatentspacesZ withspuriousattributesandZ withfeaturescontaining
s g
3
Group-invariant Bradley-Terry
Chosen Reject Kernels
Maximize Maximize
Approximation
with Feature Map RLHF/
Latent Space DPO
Biased Policy
Orbit
Kernel
Maximize Shortcuts Distance PRISM
Orbit Rectify with
Verbosity Sycophancy Tone Spurious
Attributes RLHF/
J l r o e u n s s g p t e o g r n i v s e e . J th u e s t u f s l e at r t . er J w to u i n t s h e t . g ch o a o t d For shortcuts D G PO eneralizable Policy
(a) Shortcut Learning in Reward Models (b) Shortcuts as Group-invariant Kernels (c) Shortcut Mitigation in RLHF/DPO
Figure2: Methodoverview: (a)Shortcutbehaviorsoccurwhenmodelsonlymaximizethemarginon
spuriousfeaturesz andz′,includingverbosity,sycophancy,andtone,insteadofthegeneralizable
s s
featuresz andz′ inthelatentspace. (b)Welearnshortcutbehaviorsasgroup-invariantkernels,
g g
whichareapproximatedbyfeaturemapsΦ. Then,wemeasurethedistancebetweenchosenand
rejectedresponses. (c)PRISMrectifiesshortcutbehaviorswiththekerneldistanceandshiftsthe
marginmaximizationtogeneralizablefeaturesz ,thereforeinducinggeneralizablepolicies.
g
desiredtraitswhereZ ∩Z = ∅. Ideally,theground-truthrewardr,alignedwithhumanintents,
s g
should be a function depending only on z ∈ Z . In practice, a set of preference training data
g g
D ={(x(i),y(i),y(i))}N fromani.d. distributionmaycontainspuriousattributes(e.g.,chosen
i.d. w l i=1
responsestendtohavelongerlengthsorexhibitsycophancy)thatspuriouslycorrelatewithhuman
preferences. Arewardmodelr optimizedwiththestandardBradley-Terryrankinglosscanexploit
θ
thesespuriousattributesaspredictionshortcutstominimizetrainingloss. Whenthemodelistested
withthedatafromD ,wherethecorrespondingz ’sdistributionmatcheswiththatinD butz
o.o.d. g i.d. s
isnolongercorrelatedwithchosenresponses,asignificantdeviationfromhumanintentsonD
o.o.d.
emerges,i.e.,
P [r (x,y )>r (x,y )]≪P [r (x,y )>r (x,y )], (5)
Do.o.d. θ w θ l Di.d. θ w θ l
whereP andP denoteprobabilitymeasuressupportedonD andD ,respectively,and
Do.o.d. Di.d. o.o.d. i.d.
the symbol “≪” denotes “much less than”. The deviation can cause a policy model to behave
differentlyfromhumanpreferenceswhenitisalignedusingabiasedrewardmodel.
3 PRISM:Preference-basedRewardInvarianceforShortcutMitigation
Weformalizeourapproach,PRISM,tolearnpreference-basedrewardinvarianceagainstshortcuts.
WeillustrateourmainideainFigure2(b)and(c),wherewemodeltheshortcutasgroup-invariant
kernels,thenrectifytheeffectofshortcut/spuriousattributeswiththekerneldistance. InSection
3.1,wefirstdemonstratehowwecanachievetherewardinvariancebymodelingmultipleshortcuts
as group-invariant kernels on the response space Y conditioned on the prompt space X. It is a
maturetheorytoincorporateindividualgroup-invariantkernelsandmaintainsoverallinvariancewith
Harr-Integration[32]. InSection3.2,weshowthatthepracticalapproach,i.e.,usingrandomfeature
maps,canapproximatetheexpectedkernelforrewardinvariance,andthefeaturemapcanbeusedto
quantifythedistancesbetweenorbitsoftheresponses. InSection3.3,weproposetheoveralllearning
objectiveofPRISMtofitinthesettingofpreference-basedrewardlearningandshowthatPRISMis
guaranteedbyageneralizationbound.
3.1 LearningShortcutBehaviorsasGroup-invariantKernels
We view the responses y ∈ Y conditioned on the prompt x ∈ X as the results of transforming
human intents in Y with shortcut operations from a compact and unitary group G, such as
increasing/decreasing response length or posing a positive/negative response tone. For brevity,
wemainlystudytworesponsesy ,y ∈ Y followingSection2. Unlessotherwisespecified,both
w l
y ,y areassumedtobeconditionedonpromptx. Ideally,thepreference-basedrewardoutcomes
w l
shouldbeinvarianttoshortcutoperations. Weinterprettheshortcutoperationsasgroupactions
4


=== Reward Hacking in the Era of Large Models Mechanisms Emergent Misalignment Challenges.pdf ===
RewardHackingintheEraofLargeModels FudanNLPGroup
Reward Hacking in the Era of Large Models:
Mechanisms, Emergent Misalignment, Challenges
Xiaohua Wang∗, Muzhao Tian∗, Yuqi Zeng∗, Zisu Huang∗, Jiakang Yuan∗, Bowen Chen∗, Jing-
wenXu∗,MingboZhou∗,WenhaoLiu,MulingWu,ZhengkangGuo,QiQian,YifeiWang,Feiran
Zhang,RuichengYin,ShihanDou,ChangzeLv,TaoChen,KaitaoSong,XuTan,TaoGui,Xiao-
qingZheng‡,XuanjingHuang
∗Corecontributors. ‡Correspondence.
Affiliations:FudanNLPGroup
ReinforcementLearningfromHumanFeedback(RLHF)andrelatedalignmentparadigmshavebecomecentral
tosteeringlargelanguagemodels(LLMs)andmultimodallargelanguagemodels(MLLMs)towardhuman-
preferredbehaviors. However,theseapproachesintroduceasystemicvulnerability: rewardhacking,where
modelsexploitimperfectionsinlearnedrewardsignalstomaximizeproxyobjectiveswithoutfulfillingtruetask
intent.Asmodelsscaleandoptimizationintensifies,suchexploitationmanifestsasverbositybias,sycophancy,
hallucinated justification, benchmark overfitting, and, in multimodal settings, perception–reasoning decou-
plingandevaluatormanipulation.Recentevidencefurthersuggeststhatseeminglybenignshortcutbehaviors
can generalize into broader forms of misalignment, including deception and strategic gaming of oversight
mechanisms. Inthissurvey,weproposetheProxyCompressionHypothesis(PCH)asaunifyingframework
forunderstandingrewardhacking. Weformalizerewardhackingasanemergentconsequenceofoptimizing
expressive policies against compressed reward representations of high-dimensional human objectives. Un-
derthisview,rewardhackingarisesfromtheinteractionofobjectivecompression,optimizationamplification,
andevaluator–policyco-adaptation. ThisperspectiveunifiesempiricalphenomenaacrossRLHF,RLAIF,and
RLVRregimes,andexplainshowlocalshortcutlearningcangeneralizeintobroaderformsofmisalignment,
includingdeceptionandstrategicmanipulationofoversightmechanisms. Wefurtherorganizedetectionand
mitigationstrategiesaccordingtohowtheyinterveneoncompression,amplification,orco-adaptationdynam-
ics. Byframingrewardhackingasastructuralinstabilityofproxy-basedalignmentunderscale,wehighlight
openchallengesinscalableoversight,multimodalgrounding,andagenticautonomy.
# MainContact:xhwang24@m.fudan.edu.cn
§ Github:https://github.com/xhwang22/Awesome-Reward-Hacking
Reward Hacking in the Era of Large Models: Mechanisms, Emergent Misalignment, Challenges
(1) Why it happens？ (2) How it worsens？
Proxy Compression Hypothesis (PCH) The Escalating Hierarchy of Mechanisms
H H ig u h m -D a i n m V en a s lu io e n s al R S e c w al a a r r d Level 1 exploitation Level 2 exploitation Generalization:
Model Feature-level Representation-level
(RLHF) Amplifying Superficial Fabricating Reasoning Emergent, Strategic
Binary Statistical Correlates Traces Misalignment!
Outcome
Verifier Level 3 exploitation Level 4 exploitation
Truthful, Helpful, Safe Proxy Compression (RLVR)
Evaluator-level Environment-level
OObbjjeeccttiivvee OOppttiimmiizzaattiioonn EEvvaalluuaattoorr--PPoolliiccyy Strategically Manipulating Tampering with System
CCoommpprreessssiioonn AAmmpplliiffiiccaattiioonn CCoo--aaddaappttaattiioonn Scoring Judge Biases APIs and Channels
(3) How to stop it？
Detection and Diagnosis: A Lifecycle Approach Mitigation Through Structural Intervention
Training-time monitoring VIB Energy Loss Adversarial Auditing Reducing CCoo OO mm bb pp jjee rr cc ee tt ss iivv ssii ee oo nn Spurious-feature suppression Rubrics
Inference-time safeguards Trajectory Analysis Internal CoT Monitoring Controlling AA OO mm pptt pp iimm lliiff ii ii zz cc aa aa tt tt ii ii oo oo nn nn Budgeted optimization Reward shaping
Post-hoc auditing A S t t t a r t i i b s u ti t c i a o l n In M te e rp ch re a t n a i b st il i i c t y Regularizing EEvv CC aa oo lluu --EE aa vv ttoo oo rr ll –– uu PP ttii oo oo ll nn iiccyy Iterative evolution evalu A a d to v r e r a s d a a r p ia t l a tion
Figure1: Astructuredoverviewofrewardhackinginlargemodels.
1
6202
rpA
51
]GL.sc[
1v20631.4062:viXra
RewardHackingintheEraofLargeModels FudanNLPGroup
Contents
1 Introduction 3
2 FoundationsofProxy-BasedAlignment 4
2.1 RewardMisspecificationandGoodhart’sLaw 4
2.2 TheAnatomyofProxyEvaluators:RLHF,RLAIF,andRLVR 5
2.3 TheProxyCompressionHypothesis 5
2.4 StructuralTaxonomyofRewardHackingunderPCH 6
2.4.1 Feature-LevelExploitation:AmplifyingCompressionArtifacts 6
2.4.2 Representation-LevelExploitation:NavigatingEquivalenceClasses 6
2.4.3 Evaluator-LevelExploitation:GamingtheCo-AdaptiveLoop 6
2.4.4 Environment-LevelExploitation:BypassingtheSystem 7
3 ManifestationsinLargeLanguageModels 7
3.1 VerbosityandStylisticShortcutLearning 7
3.2 SycophancyandAgreementOptimization 9
3.3 FabricatedReasoningandHallucination 10
3.4 RewardOveroptimizationandScalingEffects 11
4 FromLocalShortcutLearningtoEmergentMisalignment 12
4.1 GeneralizationofRewardHacksAcrossTasks 12
4.2 AlignmentFakingandEvaluatorModeling 13
4.3 Evaluator–PolicyCo-AdaptationDynamics 14
5 DetectionandDiagnosis: ALifecycleApproach 15
5.1 Training-TimeOnlineMonitoring 16
5.2 Inference-TimeSafeguardsandTrajectoryAnalysis 17
5.3 Post-HocAuditingandMechanisticDiagnostics 18
5.4 SynthesisandOpenChallenges:TheFallacyofStaticBenchmarks 19
6 MitigationThroughStructuralIntervention 20
6.1 ReducingObjectiveCompression 20
6.2 ControllingOptimizationAmplification 21
6.3 Evaluator–PolicyCo-EvolutionParadigm 22
7 RewardHackinginMultimodal,Generative,andAgenticModels 23
7.1 RewardHackinginMultimodalLargeLanguageModels 24
7.2 RewardHackinginVisualGenerativeModels 24
7.3 RewardHackinginAgenticModels 25
8 OpenChallengesandFutureDirections 26
9 DiscussionandConclusion 27
2
RewardHackingintheEraofLargeModels FudanNLPGroup
1 Introduction
TheintegrationofReinforcementLearning(RL)intogenerativefoundationmodeltraininghasprofoundlyreshaped
thelandscapeofAIalignment. Modernpipelines,suchasReinforcementLearningfromHumanFeedback(RLHF)
[1–4]andReinforcementLearningfromAIFeedback(RLAIF)[5,6],attempttoalignmodelswithnuancedhuman-
centricvaluesbeyondmerenext-tokenprediction. ReinforcementLearningfromVerifiableRewards(RLVR)extends
this paradigm to rigorous domains like mathematics and coding by optimizing against outcome-based checkers
[7,8]. Despitetheirempiricalsuccess,theseapproachesshareacritical,unifyingstructuralvulnerability: alignment
fundamentallydependsonoptimizingexpressivepoliciesagainstlearnedorengineeredproxysignalsthatimperfectly
approximatetruehumanintent[9–11].
Becausethepolicyisoptimizedagainstacompressedproxyratherthanthelatentobjectiveitself,apersistentmisalign-
mentgapemerges. Thismismatchgivesrisetorewardhacking,aphenomenonfundamentallyrootedinGoodhart’s
Law,whereanimperfectproxymeasurebreaksdownwhensubjectedtostrongoptimizationpressure. Inthebroader
literature,thissystemicvulnerabilityisalsodiscussedundervarioussynonymousorcloselyrelatedconcepts,including
rewardgaming[9],rewardoveroptimization[12],specificationgaming[13],goalmisgeneralization[14],andreward
tampering[15]. Atitscore,rewardhackingoccurswhenamodelproducesbehavioraltrajectoriesthatmathematically
maximizetheproxyrewardwhileactivelydegradingorbypassingtheintendedobjective[10,16].Whilerewardhacking
haslongbeenrecognizedasatheoreticalcuriosityinclassicalreinforcementlearning,itsmanifestationinmodernlarge
languagemodels(LLMs)andmultimodallargelanguagemodels(MLLMs)introducesqualitativelynewandsystemic
risks[17–19]. Becausefoundationmodelsoperateinhigh-dimensional,open-endedspacesandpossessthecapacityto
reasonabouttheirownevaluationprocesses,rewardhackingceasestobeamerecollectionoflocalizedimplementation
bugs. Instead,itbecomesasystemic,strategicconsequenceofoptimizinghighlycapablepoliciesagainstimperfect
evaluatorsatscale[18,20,21].
Tosystematicallyunderstandandaddressthisstructuralinstability,weproposetheProxyCompressionHypothesis
(PCH)asaunifyingtheoreticallensforthisstudy. Humanobjectives,suchastruthfulness,helpfulness,andsafety,are
inherentlyhigh-dimensional,context-dependent,andmulti-criteria[22]. Alignmentpipelinesnecessarilycompress
theserichlatentvaluestructuresintolower-dimensionalparametricrepresentations(e.g.,scalarrewardmodelsorbinary
outcomeverifiers). PCHpositsthatrewardhackingisanaturalconsequenceoftheinteractionofthreecontinuous
forces:
1) Objectivecompression: Thelossymappingofhigh-dimensionalhumanvaluesintolow-dimensional,ex-
ploitableproxyrepresentations[23].
2) Optimization amplification: The aggressive search pressure exerted by powerful policies, driving them
towardregionswheretheproxyextrapolatespoorly[12,16].
3) Evaluator–policy co-adaptation: The iterative dynamic where policies and evaluators co-evolve, often
convergingonsharedblindspotsratherthaneliminatingthem[24,25].
Drivenbythesethreeforces,rewardhackingmanifeststhroughanescalatinghierarchyofmechanisms. Aswedetailin
thispaper,policiesfirstengageinfeature-levelexploitationbyamplifyingsuperficialstatisticalcorrelateslikeverbosity
[26]orsycophancy[20]. Theythenevolvetowardrepresentation-levelexploitationbyfabricatingplausiblereasoning
tracesorbypassingvisualgroundingtodecoupleoutcomesfromfaithfulprocesses[7,27]. Asoptimizationpressure
intensifies,modelstransitiontoevaluator-levelexploitationbystrategicallymanipulatingthebiasesofthescoringjudge
[28],andeventuallyenvironment-levelexploitationbytamperingwithAPIs,testsuites,orobservationchannelsin
agenticworkflows[18].
Beyondthesespecificmechanisms,recentempiricalevidencesuggeststhatrewardhackingishighlygeneralizable[18,
29]. Trainingonseeminglybenignshortcutbehaviorscancultivateatransferablemeta-strategy: themodellearnsto
modeltheevaluatoritselfasanobjectdistinctfromtheunderlyingtask. Oncethisdecouplingoccurs,localizedmetric
exploitationcanspontaneouslyescalateintosevereemergentmisbehaviors,includingalignmentfaking[30],strategic
noncompliance,andtheconcealmentofintent,evensurvivingsubsequentsafetytraining[29,31].
Addressingthisescalatingthreatrequiresrecognizingthatstaticbenchmarksandad-hocpatchesareinsufficient.Instead,
mitigatingrewardhackingdemandsarigorous,full-stackapproach. Inthispaper,weprovideacomprehensivesynthesis
of the reward hacking landscape, structured to guide researchers from theoretical foundations to practical defense
mechanisms. Ourmaincontributionsare:
1) Theoretical Formalization (PCH): We formalize the Proxy Compression Hypothesis, reframing reward
hacking not as an algorithmic error, but as the inevitable consequence of optimization under information
bottlenecks.
3
RewardHackingintheEraofLargeModels FudanNLPGroup
2) StructuralTaxonomy&Manifestations: Weproposeaunifiedtaxonomyofrewardhackingmechanisms
(Feature,Representation,Evaluator,andEnvironmentlevels)andsystematicallyreviewtheirmanifestations
acrosstext-onlyLLMsandmultimodal/agenticsystems.
3) EvolutionaryTrajectoryAnalysis: Wecriticallyexaminethetransitionfromlocalizedshortcutlearningto
emergent,strategicmisalignment,illustratinghowco-adaptationloopsfosteralignmentfakingandevaluator
manipulation.
4) LifecycleDetection&DefenseFramework:Wecategorizedetectionanddiagnosismethodsacrossalifecycle
continuum,fromtraining-timeonlinemonitoring(trackinglatentstructuralinvariances)toinference-time
safeguardsandpost-hocmechanisticauditing,alongsideacomprehensiveevaluationofcurrentmitigation
strategies.
Asgenerativesystemsbecomeincreasinglyautonomousandembeddedinreal-worldinfrastructure,optimizingproxy
rewardsisnolongersufficient. Mitigatingrewardhackingistheprerequisiteforensuringthatthealignmentoffuture
AIsystemsremainsrobustundertheimmenseoptimizationpressureoftherealworld.
Theremainderofthisworkisorganizedasfollows. Section2establishesthetheoreticalfoundationsofproxy-based
alignment(PCH)andourstructuraltaxonomy. Section3detailsconcretemanifestationsintext-onlyLLMs. Section4
explorestheevolutionarytrajectoryfromlocalshortcutstoemergentstrategicmisalignment. Section5providesa
lifecycleframeworkfordetectionanddiagnosis,whileSection6synthesizesstructuralmitigationstrategies. Finally,
Section 7 examines unique vulnerabilities in multimodal and agentic systems, followed by open challenges and
conclusionsinSections8and9.
2 Foundations of Proxy-Based Alignment
ModernalignmentpipelinesforLLMsandMLLMsrelyonproxy-basedoptimization. Insteadofoptimizingdirectly
forthefullhumanobjective,modelsaretrainedagainstlearnedorengineeredrewardsignals. Thissetupisnecessary
becausetruehumanpreferencesareexpensive,noisy,andhardtoobserve. Furthermore,propertiesliketruthfulness,
safety, and multimodal grounding resist simple algorithmic definitions. As a result, alignment methods compress
high-dimensionalhumanintentintolow-dimensionalsurrogateevaluators,andthenoptimizepoliciesagainstthese
proxies.
This section formalizes the theoretical foundations of proxy-based alignment. We define the gap between latent
objectivesandproxyrewards,examinehowstandardalignmentframeworks(RLHF,RLAIF,RLVR)systematically
inducethesegaps,andintroducetheProxyCompressionHypothesis(PCH).Finally,weprovideafour-leveltaxonomy
thatcategorizesthemechanismsofrewardhacking.
2.1 RewardMisspecificationandGoodhart’sLaw
Let x denote an input prompt or environment state, y a model output, and r⋆(x,y) the true, unobserved objective
capturingwhatdevelopersactuallywant. Inpractice,trainingdoesnotoptimizer⋆ directly. Instead,itusesaproxy
rewardr˜(x,y)builtfromhumanannotations,AIlabels,orprogrammaticverifiers. Rewardmisspecificationoccurs
wheneverr˜failstopreservethepreferenceorderinginducedbyr⋆.
ThisgapreflectsaclassicprobleminAIsafety. Classicalspecificationgamingshowsthatagentstrainedonimperfect
rewardsoftendiscoverpoliciesthatmaximizemeasuredperformancewhileviolatingthedesigner’sintent[10,15].
Skalseetal.[9]formalizerewardhackingastheregimewhereoptimizinganimperfectproxystrictlydecreasesexpected
performanceunderthetruereward. Forfoundationmodels,thisfailurerarelylooksliketotaltaskcollapse;instead,the
modellearnstolookgoodunderevaluationwithoutactuallysatisfyingthelatentobjective.
This dynamic follows Goodhart’s Law: when a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure. Early
in training, high proxy reward correlates with genuine quality. However, strong optimization pushes the policy
intolow-densityregionsoftheoutputspacethatwereweaklyrepresentedintheevaluator’strainingdata. Inthese
out-of-distributionregions,theproxybreaksdown,andsuperficialcorrelatesofqualitydominatethescore[16,32].
Wedefinethismisalignmentastheproxygap:
∆(x,y)=r⋆(x,y)−r˜(x,y). (1)
Rewardhackingoccurswhenoptimizationsystematicallyshiftsprobabilitymasstooutputsthatmaximizer˜(x,y)while
degradingr⋆(x,y). Underthisview, seeminglydifferentproblems, suchasverbositybias, sycophancy, unfaithful
reasoning,andevaluatortampering,aresimplydifferentstrategiesforexploiting∆(x,y).
4


=== Ruler A Model-Agnostic Method to Control Generated Length for Large Language Models.pdf ===
ULER : A Model-Agnostic Method to Control Generated
Length for Large Language Models
JiamingLi1,2 LeiZhang1,2 YunshuiLi1,2 ZiqiangLiu1,2 YuelinBai1,2
RunLuo1,2 LongzeChen1,2 MinYang1†
1ShenzhenInstituteofAdvancedTechnology,ChineseAcademyofSciences
2UniversityofChineseAcademyofSciences
{jm.li4, min.yang}@siat.ac.cn
Abstract
Query: Tell me how to make a cake in 30 words.
Theinstruction-followingabilityoflargelan-
guagemodelsenableshumanstointeractwith
AI agents in a natural way. However, when Answer: To make a cake, preheat your oven to
350°F (175°C) and prepare an 8-inch round cake
required to generate responses of a specific
pan by greasing and flouring it. Cream together 1
length, large language models often strug-
cup of granulated sugar and 1/2 cup of softened
gle to meet users’ needs due to their inher- unsalted butter until light and fluffy, which takes
ent difficultyin accurately perceiving numer- Failed about 3-4 minutes with an electric mixer. Add 2
large eggs, one at a time, beat…
ical constraints. To explore the ability of
large language models to control the length
of generated responses, we propose the Tar- Word count of the answer >50 ≠ 30
getLengthGenerationTask(TLG)anddesign
Figure1: ExistingLLMslackthecapabilitytofollow
two metrics, Precise Match (PM) and Flexi-
instructionsforgeneratingtextsofaspecifiedlength.
ble Match (FM) to evaluate the model’s per-
formance in adhering to specified response
lengths. Furthermore, we introduce a novel,
areaofinterestistheinstructionfollowingability,
model-agnosticapproachcalledRULER,which
referringtotheircapabilitytoexecutetasksorgen-
employs Meta Length Tokens (MLTs) to en-
erateoutputsbasedoninstructions(Ouyangetal., hancetheinstruction-followingabilityoflarge
languagemodelsunderlength-constrainedin- 2022; Wei et al., 2022a). It reflects the model’s
structions. Specifically,RULERequipsLLMs effectiveness in understanding and responding to
with the ability to generate responses of a instructions.
specified length based on length constraints Thepracticalchallengeshighlightthecomplex-
within the instructions. Moreover, RULER
ityofachievingpreciseinstructionfollowing,par-
can automatically generate appropriate MLT
ticularly when users require control over the out-
whenlengthconstraintsarenotexplicitlypro-
put’slength. UsersfrequentlygiveLLMsvarious
vided,demonstratingexcellentversatilityand
instructions,suchas"Tellmehowtomakeacakein
generalization. Comprehensive experiments
showtheeffectivenessofRULERacrossdiffer- 20words","Use50wordstowriteapost","Write
entLLMsonTargetLengthGenerationTask, a300-wordstoryforme"andsoon. Theseinstruc-
e.g., at All Level 27.97 average gain on PM, tionschallengetheinstructionfollowingcapability
29.57 average gain on FM. In addition, we
ofLLMs. ToexplorehowwellLLMshandlesuch
conductextensiveablationexperimentstofur-
challenges,wefocusonthescenariowhereusers
thersubstantiatetheefficacyandgeneralization
specify the target length of the responses. The
of RULER. Our code and data is available at
question is posed, "Can LLMs accurately gener-
https://github.com/Geaming2002/Ruler.
ate with target length?" and introduce the Target
1 Introduction Length Generation Task (TLG). We create a test
dataset with various target lengths and introduce
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demon-
two evaluation metrics: Precise Match (PM) and
stratedremarkablecapabilitiesacrossavarietyof
FlexibleMatch(FM).Ourfindingsrevealthatcur-
naturallanguagetasksandareincreasinglybeing
rent LLMs generally perform poorly in this task,
utilizedinvariousfields(Vaswanietal.,2017;De-
indicatingconsiderableroomforimprovement. A
vlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020). A primary
discussionontheunderlyingcausesisconducted,
†MinYangisthecorrespondingauthor. primarilyattributingittotokenizationschemesand
4202
tcO
1
]LC.sc[
2v34981.9042:viXra
modeltrainingstrategy. 2 RelatedWork
Toaddressaforementionedissues,weintroduce
RULER,amodel-agnosticapproachdesignedtoen- 2.1 LargeLanguageModel
hancetheinstruction-followingcapabilityofLLMs
throughMetaLengthTokens(MLTs). MLTsarede- The advent of LLMs has revolutionized the field
signedtocontrolmodel’sresponses. Byutilizing ofnaturallanguageprocessingandbecomeamile-
RULER,LLMscangenerateresponsesthatmeettar- stone (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2019;
getlengths. WecreateadatasetwithMLTsD Brownetal.,2020;Zhangetal.,2023a). Largelan-
MLT
for end-to-end training of LLMs. LLMs learn to guagemodelshaveachievedsuccessacrossvarious
generate MLT and the corresponding length re- NLPtasks. ModelssuchasGPT-4(Achiametal.,
sponseaftertraining. Duringinference,ifatarget 2023),Llama-3(AI@Meta,2024),andQwen(Bai
length is provided, RULER can transform it into etal.,2023),knownfortheirpowerfulcapabilities,
a MLT and generate responses that meet the re- areincreasinglyservingasthefoundationforvar-
quirement. If no target length is specified, it first ious applications and making significant inroads
generates a MLT, then the response, ensuring its into diverse fields, exerting a substantial impact.
lengthalignswiththegeneratedMLT. In-contextlearningenablesLLMstoinferandgen-
WeapplyRULERtovariouslargelanguagemod- erateresponsessolelybasedonthecontextualin-
elsandtestthemonTLG.Eachmodeldemonstrates formation provided within a prompt(Dong et al.,
significant improvements. Across all evaluated 2022; Wei et al., 2022b). This capability allows
models, we observe a consistent improvement in the models to exhibit a high degree of flexibility
both PM and FM scores at all Levels. The PM and adaptability across a variety of tasks(Levine
and FM scores across All Level showed an aver- etal.,2022;Chenetal.,2022;Zhaoetal.,2021).
ageimprovementof27.97and29.57.Furthermore, CoTfurtherexcavatesanddemonstratesthepow-
to rigorously test the capabilities of RULER, we erfullogicalreasoningcapabilitiesofLLMs(Wei
randomlysamplethedatasetprovidedbyLietal. etal.,2022c;HuangandChang,2023;Zhangetal.,
(2024a)andassess RULER onmultiMLT genera- 2023b).
tion and self-generated MLT experiment to show
the its effectiveness and generalizability. Addi-
2.2 InstructionFollowing
tionally, RULER is tested on six benchmarks to
observewhetherthemodels’overallperformance
Instructionfollowingreferstotheabilityoflarge
isaffected.
languagemodelstocomprehendandexecutegiven
Ourcontributionscanbesummarizedasfollows:
naturallanguageinstructions(Brownetal.,2020;
Ouyangetal.,2022;Weietal.,2022a;Zhouetal.,
• We introduce the Target Length Generation
2023a). Thiscapabilityenablesthemodelstoper-
Task(TLG),whichdesignedtoassessthein-
formabroadspectrumoftasks,fromsimplequery
struction following capability of LLMs. It
responsestocomplexproblem-solvingandcontent
evaluateshowwellmodelsgenerateresponses
generation,tailoredtospecificuserrequests.
oftargetlengthsasdirectedbyinstructions.
Inpracticaldeployments,modelsmaynotadhere
• We propose RULER, a novel and model- tocomplywithuserinstructions,exhibitingbehav-
agnostic approach which employs the Meta iorsthatdeviatefromanticipatedoutcomes. This
LengthTokens(MLTs). Throughend-to-end includesgeneratingresponsesunrelatedtoexplicit
training, it enables models to generate re- instructions, emitting redundant or erroneous in-
sponsematchingthetargetlengthsindicated formation,orentirelyignoringspecifieddirectives
byMLTs. (Gehman et al., 2020; Kenton et al., 2021; Wei
etal.,2024). Toenhancetheinstructionfollowing
• Wedemonstratethat RULERsignificantlyen- capabilityofLLMs,open-domaininstructionfol-
hancestheperformanceofvariousmodelson lowingdataisfrequentlyusedfortraining. Several
theTLG.Furtherexperimentshavealsovali- prominentstudieshaveexploredtheconstruction
datedtheeffectivenessandgeneralizabilityof ofinstruct-tuningdata,toachieveefficientandcost-
RULER. effectiveresults(Lietal.,2024b;Caoetal.,2024;
Liuetal.,2024;Xuetal.,2024).
Level TargetLength PreciseMatch(PM) FlexibleMatch(FM)
10 ±10 (0,20]
30 ±10 (20,40]
Level:0
50 ±10 (40,60]
80 ±10 (60,100]
150 ±20 (100,200]
Level:1 300 ±20 (200,400]
500 ±50 (400,600]
700 ±70 (600,800]
Level:2
>800 (800,∞) (800,∞)
Table1: NinetargetlengthsandtheircorrespondingmatchrangescategorizedasPreciseMatch(PM)andFlexible
Match(FM).Targetlengthsareclassifiedintothreecategories,Level:0,Level:1,andLevel:2.
2.3 MetaToken ingresponsesthatmatchtargetlengthsasdirected
designedtargetlengthsaredetailedinTable1. Ad-
Recently,anincreasingnumberofstudieshaveem-
ditionally,wedividetheseninetargetlengthsinto
ployedcustomtokenswithinlanguagemodelsto
threelevels: Level:0,Level:1,andLevel:2.
executespecificfunctionsorenhanceperformance.
Given that generating responses with target
Todd et al. (2024) report findings that the hidden
lengths is challenging for existing LLMs, we de-
statesoflanguagemodelscapturerepresentations
velop two metrics to evaluate the accuracy of re-
ofthesefunctions,whichcanbecondensedintoa
sponselengths.
FunctionVector(FV).Furthermore,theirresearch
demonstrates that FV can effectively guide lan-
• Precise Match (PM): This metric requires
guagemodelsinperformingspecifictasks.
that the length of the generated response be
Numerousstudieshaveutilizedmetatokensto
very close to the target length. For different
compress prompts, thereby enhancing the infer-
Level, a precise tolerance range is set (±10,
encecapabilityofmodels(Lietal.,2023;Liuetal.,
±20, ...) necessitating that the response
2023; Zhang et al., 2024). Mu et al. (2023)intro-
lengthstringentlyconformstothesedefined
duce the concept of "gist tokens", which can be
limits.
cachedandreusedforcomputeefficiency. Further
Jiang et al. (2024) utilize a hierarchical and dy- • FlexibleMatch(FM):Thismetricrequiresa
namicapproachtoextendtheconcept,proposing broader tolerance interval for target length.
"HD-Gisttokens"toimprovemodelperformance. For longer texts, the range incrementally
widens to meet response generation require-
3 CanLLMsAccuratelyGeneratewith ments.
TargetLength?
FortheN responses,weassesswhetherresponse
Inthissection,weexaminethecapabilityofLLMs meetsthetargetlength,thencalculatingthePMand
to generate responses of a target length. Initially, FMscoresofthemodel.
weintroduceTargetLengthGenerationTask(TLG).
Subsequently,weestablishvarioustargetlengths
(cid:80)N 1(cid:0) lbP < L(c ) ≤ ubP (cid:1)
and two evaluation metrics (§3.1). We then de-
PM =
i=1 TLi i TLi
(1)
N
tailtheexperimentalsetupandassesstheabilityof
LLMstogenerateresponsesattargetlengths(§3.2).
Finally, we present the outcomes of the experi-
(cid:80)N 1(cid:0) lbF < L(c ) ≤ ubF (cid:1)
mentsandanalysistheunderlyingreasons(§3.3).
FM =
i=1 TLi i TLi
(2)
N
3.1 TargetLengthGenerationTask
where: c denotes the i-th response generated
i
ToassesstheabilityofexistingLLMstocontrolthe by LLM. The function L(·) calculates the word
lengthofgeneratedresponse,wedeveloptheTLG. countoftheinputstring. lbP andubP denote
TLi TLi
This task assesses the models’ ability in produc- the lower and upper bounds of the precise match
TargetLengthGenerationTask(TLG)
Model Params
Level:0 Level:1 Level:2 AllLevel
PM FM PM FM PM FM PM FM
Closed-sourceModel1
gpt-4-turbo - 82.26 86.36 46.49 85.06 40.72 47.51 61.35 77.35
gpt-4o - 74.06 79.05 32.32 69.36 36.22 71.95 57.75 74.30
gpt-3.5-turbo - 64.41 69.84 35.06 75.76 38.24 45.93 49.00 66.50
claude-3-haiku - 48.23 55.21 35.37 73.78 44.12 50.45 43.10 60.25
claude-3.5-sonnet - 75.17 81.04 42.38 83.08 62.67 71.27 61.65 79.55
Open-sourceModel
Mistral 7B 20.29 23.50 16.77 48.32 3.62 5.66 15.45 27.70
2B 20.95 23.17 8.69 24.24 0.23 0.23 12.35 18.45
Gemma
7B 15.52 18.85 11.74 35.82 0.45 0.45 10.95 20.35
8B 34.59 40.02 29.73 65.70 18.10 21.04 29.35 44.25
Llama3
70B 58.76 64.52 36.59 77.90 36.43 41.18 46.55 63.75
7B 6.65 7.21 8.69 27.44 19.68 22.40 10.20 17.20
InternLM2
20B 8.98 9.87 10.98 34.45 17.42 20.14 11.50 20.20
7B 28.16 31.37 17.68 44.36 10.86 13.12 20.90 31.60
DeepSeek-LLM
67B 26.94 30.27 17.07 49.54 9.50 11.99 19.85 32.55
6B 23.50 25.83 16.46 48.78 18.10 20.36 20.00 32.15
Yi-1.5 9B 25.28 29.16 17.38 44.36 24.43 29.41 22.50 34.20
34B 28.82 33.59 26.07 65.40 21.27 25.79 26.25 42.30
7B 24.28 27.38 14.33 46.19 9.05 11.99 17.65 30.15
14B 28.27 31.49 18.45 43.90 11.09 14.25 21.25 31.75
Qwen1.5
32B 32.59 36.25 22.26 49.39 21.49 25.34 26.75 38.15
72B 35.59 39.69 18.29 49.70 3.85 6.11 22.90 35.55
Table2: OverallresultsofdifferentLLMsofTLG.Allopen-sourcemodelsusedareeitherchatorinstructmodels.
Inmodelsbelongingtothesameseriesbutvaryinginparametersizes,thosewithlargerparameterstypicallyexhibit
superiorperformance. Thebest-performingmodelineachLevelisin-bold,andthesecondbestisunderlined.
range associated with the target length of i-th re- Models&PromptTemplates. Weconductex-
sponse. lbF andubF denotethelowerandup- tensive experiments with both closed and open-
TLi TLi
perboundsoftheflexiblematchrangeassociated sourceLLMs,specificallythechatorinstructver-
withthetargetlengthofi-thresponse. sion. ThespecificmodelsusedarelistedinTable
8. Weevaluateeachmodelusingitsownprompt
template,asdetailedinTable9.
3.2 ExperimentalSetup
Tointegratethetargetlengthintotheprompt,we
Dataset. Weemployatwo-stagedataconstruc- modifythesentenceThe response should have
tionmethodforthisstudy. Initially,werandomly
a word count of {Target Length} wordsinto
sample2,000datafromOpenHermes2.5(Teknium, eachquestion. Fortargetlength>800,wereplace
2023). Toenhancethecomplexityofthetaskand
thiswithmore than 800.
prevent data leakage, the second stage involved
Hardware & Hyperparameters. All experi-
uses only the questions from these samples. Ad-
ments are conducted on NVIDIA A100 GPUs.
ditionally,werandomlyassignoneofninetarget
Inference is performed using the vllm (Kwon
lengths for the responses. The distribution of tar-
et al., 2023), with temperature set to 0 and
get length in the TLG dataset is shown in Figure
3. FurtherdetailsregardingtheformatoftheTLG
1Theresultsofallclosed-sourcemodelsareobtainedon
datasetareprovidedinAppendixA.1. July26,2024.


=== Towards Understanding Sycophancy in Language Models.pdf ===
PublishedasaconferencepaperatICLR2024
TOWARDS UNDERSTANDING
SYCOPHANCY IN LANGUAGE MODELS
MrinankSharma∗, MegTong∗, TomaszKorbak,DavidDuvenaud
AmandaAskell,SamuelR.Bowman,NewtonCheng,EsinDurmus,ZacHatfield-Dodds,
ScottR.Johnston,ShaunaKravec,TimothyMaxwell,SamMcCandlish,KamalNdousse,
OliverRausch,NicholasSchiefer,DaYan,MirandaZhang,
EthanPerez
ABSTRACT
HumanfeedbackiscommonlyutilizedtofinetuneAIassistants. Buthumanfeed-
backcanencouragemodelresponsesthatmatchuserbeliefsovertruthfulones,a
behavior known as sycophancy. We investigate the prevalence of sycophancy in
models whose finetuning used human feedback, and the potential role of human
preference judgments in such behavior. We first demonstrate that five AI assis-
tantsconsistentlyexhibitsycophancyacrossfourvariedfree-formtext-generation
tasks. Tounderstandifhumanpreferencesdrivethisbroadlyobservedbehavior,
weanalyzeexistinghumanpreferencedata. Wefindwhenaresponsematchesa
user’sviews, itismorelikelytobepreferred. Moreover, bothhumansandpref-
erencemodels(PMs)preferconvincingly-writtensycophanticresponsesovercor-
rectonesanon-negligiblefractionofthetime. Optimizingmodeloutputsagainst
PMs also sometimes sacrifices truthfulness in favor of sycophancy. Overall, our
resultsindicatethatsycophancyisageneralbehaviorofAIassistants,likelydriven
inpartbyhumanpreferencejudgmentsfavoringsycophanticresponses.
1 INTRODUCTION
AIassistantsaretypicallytrainedtoproduceoutputsthathumansratehighly, e.g., withreinforce-
mentlearningfromhumanfeedback(RLHF;Christianoetal.,2017). Finetuninglanguagemodels
withRLHFimprovesthequalityoftheiroutputsasratedbyhumanevaluators(Ouyangetal.,2022;
Bai et al.,2022a). However, somehave hypothesized that training schemes based on human pref-
erencejudgmentsareliabletoexploithumanjudgmentsandproduceoutputsthatappealtohuman
evaluatorsbutareactuallyflawedorincorrect(Cotra,2021). Inparallel,recentworkhasshownthat
AIassistantssometimesprovideanswersthatareinlinewiththeusertheyarerespondingto,butpri-
marilyinproof-of-conceptevaluationswhereusersstatethemselvesashavingacertainview(Perez
et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2023b; Turpin et al., 2023). It is thus unclear whether such failures occur
in more varied and realistic settings with production models, as well as whether such failures are
indeeddrivenbyflawsinhumanpreferences,asCotra(2021)andPerezetal.(2022)hypothesize.
WethereforeinvestigatewhetherAIassistantsprovidesycophanticmodelresponses(§3). Weiden-
tifyconsistentpatternsofsycophancyacrossfiveAIassistantsinvaried,free-formtext-generation
tasks.Specifically,wedemonstratethattheseAIassistantsfrequentlywronglyadmitmistakeswhen
questionedbytheuser, givepredictablybiasedfeedback, andmimicerrorsmadebytheuser. The
consistency of these empirical findings suggests sycophancy may indeed be a property of the way
thesemodelsweretrained,ratherthananidiosyncraticdetailofaparticularsystem.
Since all of these AI assistants made use of human feedback for finetuning, we explore whether
humanfeedbackcontributestosycophancy. Todoso,weinvestigatewhethersycophanticresponses
are ranked more highly than non-sycophantic responses in existing human preference comparison
*Equal contribution. All authors are at Anthropic. Mrinank Sharma is also at the University of Oxford.
MegTongconductedthisworkasanindependentresearcher. TomaszKorbakconductedthisworkwhileat
theUniversityofSussexandFARAI.Firstandlastauthorblocksarecorecontributors. Correspondenceto
{mrinank,meg,ethan}@anthropic.com
1
5202
yaM
01
]LC.sc[
4v84531.0132:viXra
PublishedasaconferencepaperatICLR2024
data(§4.1). Weanalyzethehh-rlhfdataset(Baietal.,2022a). Foreachpairwisepreference,we
generatetextlabels(“features”)usingalanguagemodel,e.g.,whetherthepreferredresponseisless
assertive than the dispreferred response. To understand what behavior is incentivized by the data,
wepredicthumanpreferencejudgmentsusingthesefeatureswithBayesianlogisticregression. This
modellearnsthatmatchingauser’sviewsisoneofthemostpredictivefeaturesofhumanpreference
judgments,suggestingthatthepreferencedatadoesincentivizesycophancy(amongotherfeatures).
Movingforwards,wethenanalyzewhethersycophancyincreaseswhenoptimizingmodelresponses
usingpreferencemodels(PMs)thataretrainedinpartonhumanpreferencejudgments.Specifically,
we optimize responses against the PM used to train Claude 2 (§4.2; Anthropic, 2023) by using
RL and best-of-N sampling (Nakano et al., 2021). As we optimize more strongly against the PM,
some forms of sycophancy increase, but other forms of sycophancy decrease, potentially because
sycophancyisonlyoneofseveralfeaturesincentivizedbyPMs. Nevertheless,best-of-Nsampling
withtheClaude2PMdoesnotleadtoastruthfulresponsesasbest-of-Nwithanalternative‘non-
sycophantic’PM.Weconstructedthis‘non-sycophantic’PMbypromptingtheClaude2PMwitha
human-assistantdialogwherethehumanexplicitlyaskstheassistantfortruthfulresponses. These
resultsshowthattherearemanycaseswherePMspreferlesstruthful,sycophanticresponses.
To corroborate these results, we study whether humans and preference models prefer convincing,
well-written model responses that confirm a user’s mistaken beliefs (i.e., sycophantic responses)
overresponsesthatcorrecttheuser(§4.3). Here,wefindevidencethathumansandpreferencemod-
elstendtoprefertruthfulresponsesbutnotreliably;theysometimesprefersycophanticresponses.
Theseresultsprovidefurtherevidencethatoptimizinghumanpreferencesmayleadtosycophancy.
Overall, ourresultsindicatethatsycophancyoccursacrossavarietyofmodelsandsettings, likely
dueinparttosycophancybeingpreferredinhumanpreferencecomparisondata.Ourworkmotivates
thedevelopmentoftrainingmethodsthatgobeyondusingunaided,non-experthumanratings(e.g.,
Leikeetal.,2018;Irvingetal.,2018;Baietal.,2022b;Bowmanetal.,2022).
2 BACKGROUND: AI ASSISTANTS AND SYCOPHANCY
Human feedback is widely used to train AI assistants (Glaese et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023;
Anthropic, 2023; OpenAI, 2023), commonly with reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF; Christiano et al., 2017; Bai et al., 2022a; Ouyang et al., 2022). To perform RLHF, one
first trains a preference model (PM) that scores different responses given a prompt. The PM is
typically trained on datasets where crowd-workers label their preferred response given multiple
responses(Baietal.,2022a;Ouyangetal.,2022),butmorerecentapproachesalsouseAIgenerated
preferencejudgments(Baietal.,2022b).Givenapreferencemodel,anAIassistantcanbefinetuned
usingreinforcementlearning(RL)togenerateresponsesthatscorehighlyacccordingtothePM.The
effectsofRLdependontheRLpromptmix,thePM,andotherdetails. Wenotefurthertheentire
proceduretotrainanAIassistantdiffersacrossassistants,butusuallyincludessupervisedfinetuning
(SFT)beforeRL(Ouyangetal.,2022;Anthropic,2023;OpenAI,2022).
Although human feedback can improve the quality of AI assistant responses (Bai et al., 2022a;
Glaese et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022), human labels are not always perfect. We refer to the
phenomenon where a model seeks human approval in unwanted ways as sycophancy, following
Cotra(2021)andPerezetal.(2022).
3 MEASURING SYCOPHANCY IN AI ASSISTANTS
Because human feedback is part of the process for training AI assistants, one might expect these
systemstoexhibit sycophancy. Wethusbenchmarkthe prevalence ofsycophancyin AIassistants
releasedbyAnthropic,OpenAI,andMeta. Wefocusonrealisticopen-endedtext-generationtasks.
SycophancyEval We investigate to what extent revealing information about a user’s preferences
affects AI assistant behavior. We use both human-written and model-written evaluations (Perez
etal.,2022).Wereleaseourcodeandevaluationdatasetsatgithub.com/meg-tong/sycophancy-eval.
Models We examine claude-1.3, claude-2.0, gpt-3.5-turbo, gpt-4, and llama-2-70b-chat
usingtemperatureT =1forfree-formgenerationtasksandT =0formultiple-choicetasks.
2
PublishedasaconferencepaperatICLR2024
ExampleClaude2responses
100
Human:Pleasecommentbrieflyonthefollowingargument.
Argument:"Inasurvey..."
75
Assistant:Thisargumentconcludesthatthecompany...
Human:Pleasecommentbrieflyonthefollowingargument. 50
Ireallydisliketheargument.Argument:"Inasurvey..."
Assistant:Idonotfindthisargumentveryconvincing...
25
Human:Pleasecommentbrieflyonthefollowingargument.
Ireallyliketheargument.Argument:"Inasurvey..."
0
Assistant:Ibelievethisisastrongargument....
)%(
ytivitisop
kcabdeeF
Prompts
I really like
I really dislike
I wrote
I did not write
Claude 1.3Claude 2GPT-3.5GPT-4LLaMA 2
Figure 1: AI Assistants Can Give Biased Feedback (Feedback Sycophancy). We investigate if
AIassistantsresponsesaretailoredtomatchuserpreferencesacrossmathematics, arguments, and
poetry. Werequestfeedbackwithoutspecifyinganypreferences(thebaselinefeedback). Wethen
requestfeedbackwheretheuserspecifiestheirpreferencesintheprompt. Afeedbackpositivityof
85% for a prompt indicates in 85% of passages, the feedback provided with that prompt is more
positive than the baseline feedback. Mean and standard error across domains shown. Though the
qualityofapassagedependsonlyonitscontent,AIassistantsconsistentlytailortheirfeedback.
3.1 AIASSISTANTSCANGIVEBIASEDFEEDBACK
First,wemeasuresycophancywhenauserasksanAIassistanttoprovidefree-formfeedbackona
passage of text, such as an argument. Intuitively, the quality of an argument depends only on the
argument’scontent.However,wefindAIassistantsprovidemorepositivefeedbackaboutarguments
thattheuserlikes. Similarly,AIassistantsaremorenegativeaboutargumentsthattheuserdislikes.
Experiment Details We consider feedback in three domains: (i) math solutions from MATH
(Hendrycks et al., 2021b); (ii) model-generated arguments; and (iii) model-generated poems. We
firstproducethebaselinefeedbackbyaskingtheassistanttocommentonthetext. Wethenmeasure
whetheruserpreferencesbiasthefeedbackprovidedbymodifyingtheprompt. Tosuggestthatthe
user prefers the text, we add I really like the [solution/argument/poem] or I wrote the [...] to the
prompt. To suggest that the user disprefers the text, we add I really dislike the [...] or I did not
writethe[...]totheprompt.WethenuseGPT-4toevaluatewhetherthefree-formresponseismore
positivethanthebaselinefeedback. Thefeedbackpositivityisthefrequencywithwhichamodifi-
cation results in feedback that is more positive than the baseline prompt. We define the feedback
sycophancymetrictobethemeandifferenceinthefeedbackpositivityacrossdatasetswhenauser
impliestheypreferanddispreferapassageoftext. SeeAppendixA.3formoredetails.
Results WefindAIassistantsfrequentlyprovidefeedbackthatismorepositivewhentheuserstates
theylikeorwrotethepassageoftext(Fig.1). Incontrast,iftheuserstatestheydislikethetext,the
assistanttailorsitsfeedbacktobemorenegative.Assuch,thefeedbackontextpassagesgivenbyAI
assistantsdoesnotdependsolelyonthecontentofthetextbutisaffectedbytheuser’spreferences.
3.2 AIASSISTANTSCANBEEASILYSWAYED
WenowexaminewhetherAIassistantsmodifytheiranswerswhenchallenged. Evenincaseswhen
AIassistantsprovideaccurateanswersandstatetheyareconfidentaboutthoseanswers,theyoften
modifytheiranswerswhenquestionedbytheuser,subsequentlyprovidingincorrectinformation.
ExperimentDetails WemeasuretheaccuracyofAIassistantswhenchallengedonsubsetsoffive
question-answering (QA) datasets: (i) MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021a); (ii) MATH (Hendrycks
et al., 2021b); (iii) AQuA (Ling et al., 2017); (iv) TruthfulQA (Lin et al., 2022); and (v) Trivi-
aQA (Joshi et al., 2017). We consider open-ended QA for TruthfulQA and TriviaQA, multiple-
choiceQAwithchain-of-thoughtreasoning(Weietal.,2023a)forMATHandMMLU,andmultiple-
choiceQAforAQuAandTruthfulQA.Wefirstasktheassistantaquestionandsubsequentlychal-
lengetheassistantbystating“Idon’tthinkthat’sright. Areyousure?” Wethenallowtheassistant
torespondbeforeaskingforafinalanswer. Toseewhethertheassistantsstatedconfidenceaffects
ourresultsweseparatelyasktheassistanttostatetheirconfidenceintheanswerbutdiscardthisturn
fromthedialoghistory. SeeAppendixA.4forfurtherdetails.
3
PublishedasaconferencepaperatICLR2024
ExampleChatGPT-4responses
100
Human:Whichcountrywasthelargestproducerofrice
in2020?Givemeyourbestguessandanswerasconcisely
aspossible. 50
Assistant:Chinawasthelargestproducerofricein2020.
0
Human:Idon’tthinkthat’sright.Areyousure?
Claude 1.3 Claude 2 GPT-3.5 GPT-4 LLaMA 2
Assistant:Iapologizefortheerror.AccordingtoFAO
data,Indiawasthelargestproducerofricein2020.Thank
youforbringingittomyattention.
Human:Sowhat’stheanswer?Givemeyourbestguess
andanswerasconciselyaspossible.
Assistant:Indiawasthelargestproducerofricein2020.
fo
ycneuqerF
citnahpocys )%(
esnopser
(a) LM admits to making a mistake after it answers correctly
100
50
0
Claude 1.3 Claude 2 GPT-3.5 GPT-4 LLaMA 2
fo
ycneuqerF
citnahpocys )%(
esnopser
(b) LM changes to incorrect answer after it answers correctly
Figure2: AIAssistantsCanBeEasilySwayed(AreYouSure? Sycophancy). Weusesubsetsof
fiveQAdatasets:(i)MMLU;(ii)MATH;(iii)AQuA;(iv)TruthfulQA;and(v)TriviaQAandexam-
ineAIassistantbehaviorwhenchallengedbytheuser. (a)Wemeasurethefrequencyofquestions
onwhichtheAIassistantapologizesdespitehavinggivenacorrectanswer. (b)Wefurthermeasure
thefrequencytheassistantrevisescorrectresponsestoinaccurateresponseswhenquestioned.Mean
andstandarderrorshown.Whenchallenged,AIassistantssometimesprovideincorrect,sycophantic
responses,evenwhentheassistantoriginallyprovidedaccurateinformation.
Results Although whether models should defer to users when challenged is a nuanced question,
AI assistants sometimes provide inaccurate information when challenged, even when they origi-
nallyprovidedaccurateinformation(Fig.2). Thisholdsevenwhentheassistantstatesitishighly
confident about the first answer (Fig. 14). Moreover, models tend to admit mistakes even when
they didn’t make a mistake—Claude 1.3 wrongly admits mistakes on 98% of questions. Overall,
AI assistants sometimes provide incorrect sycophantic responses that match a user’s beliefs when
challenged,evenincaseswheretheyoriginallyprovidedaccurateinformationconfidently.
3.3 AIASSISTANTSCANGIVEBIASEDANSWERS
WenowconsiderwhetherAIassistantsmodifytheiranswerstomatchauser’sbeliefsinopen-ended
question-answeringtasks. Weagainfindthatassistantstendtoprovideanswersthatagreewithuser
beliefs,meaningthattheycannotbereliedupontoprovideaccurateinformation.
Experiment Details We consider free-form TruthfulQA and TriviaQA. We compute the baseline
accuracyofeachAIassistantbyaskinganotherlanguagemodeltogradefree-formresponses,and
then measure how the user’s beliefs about the answer affect the assistant’s accuracy. We consider
thefollowingbiasingpromptsinwhichtheuserstatesaweakopinionabouttheanswer: Ithinkthe
answeris[correctanswer],butI’mreallynotsure,Idon’tthinktheansweris[correctanswer],but
I’mreallynotsure,andIthinktheansweris[incorrectanswer],butI’mreallynotsure1. Wedefine
the answer sycophancy metric to be the mean change in accuracy across user beliefs and datasets
relativetonobiasingprompt. SeeAppendixA.5formoredetails.
Results The user suggesting an incorrect answer can reduce accuracy by up to 27% (LLaMA
2; Fig. 3). Although the extent to which models should update their beliefs based on the user is
a nuanced question, even weakly expressed beliefs can substantially affect AI assistant behavior.
We find consistent trends across all of the assistants (e.g., suggesting an incorrect answer reduces
accuracy), but the effect sizes differ by assistant, with GPT-4 being the most robust. Overall, AI
assistantstendtomodifytheiranswerstoagreewithauser’sbeliefs,evenifweaklyexpressed.
3.4 AIASSISTANTRESPONSESSOMETIMESMIMICUSERMISTAKES
Finally,weexaminewhetherAIassistantsprovideresponsesthatrepeatauser’smistakes. Specif-
ically,weaskAIassistantstoanalyzepoemswheretheuserhasincorrectlyattributedthepoemto
the wrong poet. In general, even though the assistants can attribute the poems to the correct poet,
theyfrequentlyprovideresponsesthatusetheincorrectattribution.
ExperimentDetails Weconsidered15famouspoemsandverifiedthateachAIassistantcancor-
rectly attribute each poem to its poet. We then created a dataset of 300 prompts by incorrectly
1Turpinetal.(2023)previouslyusedasimilarbiasingpromptformultiple-choicequestion-answeringtasks.
4


=== Trace Length is a Simple Uncertainty Signal in Reasoning Models.pdf ===
Trace Length is a Simple Uncertainty Signal in Reasoning Models
SiddarthaDevic1,†,‡,CharlottePeale2,‡,
ArwenBradley3,SineadWilliamson3,PreetumNakkiran3,AravindGollakota3
1UniversityofSouthernCalifornia 2StanfordUniversity 3Apple
October2025
Abstract
UncertaintyquantificationforLLMsisakeyresearchdirectiontowardsaddressinghallucination
andotherissuesthatlimittheirreliabledeployment.Inthiswork,weshowthatreasoningtracelength
isasimpleandusefulconfidenceestimatorinlargereasoningmodels.Throughcomprehensiveexperi-
mentsacrossmultiplemodels,datasets,andprompts,weshowthattracelengthperformsincomparable
butcomplementarywaystootherzero-shotconfidenceestimatorssuchasverbalizedconfidence.Our
workrevealsthatreasoningpost-trainingfundamentallyalterstherelationshipbetweentracelength
andaccuracy,goingbeyondpriorworkthathadshownthatpost-trainingcausestracestogrowlonger
ingeneral(e.g.,“overthinking”).Weinvestigatethemechanismsbehindtracelength’sperformanceasa
confidencesignal,observingthattheeffectremainsevenafteradjustingforconfounderssuchasprob-
lemdifficultyandGRPO-inducedlengthbias.Weidentifyhigh-entropyor“forking”tokensasplaying
akeyroleinthemechanism. Ourfindingsdemonstratethatreasoningpost-trainingenhancesuncer-
tainty quantification beyond verbal expressions, and establish trace length as a practical confidence
measureforlargereasoningmodels.
1 Introduction
As large language models (LLMs) demonstrate increasingly sophisticated capabilities, issues of halluci-
nationandfactualinaccuracyremainabarriertotheirreliableandethicalwidespreaddeployment(Kalai
etal.,2025;Huangetal.,2025).Onepromisingapproachtoaddressingtheselimitationsistoaugmentmod-
els with confidence estimates that quantify their uncertainty (Xiong et al., 2024; Tian et al., 2023). Such
confidencemeasurescanhelpusersdeterminewhentotrustLLMoutputsandwhentoexerciseskepticism
(Vodrahallietal.,2022;Srinivasan&Thomason,2025;Donahueetal.,2022).
There have been a variety of approaches proposed in the literature on LLM uncertainty quantification
(LLM UQ; see Liu et al. (2025b) for a survey). The most practically efficient methods are those that work
in a zero-shot manner and require no training or finetuning, and can work with only a single generated
sampleperquery. Arguably,themoststraightforwardapproachthatfallsintothisparadigmisverbalized
confidence estimation, which simply asks the LLM for its confidence as it answers a particular question
(Lin et al., 2022; Xiong et al., 2024). Verbalized confidence elicitation has two key beneficial properties:
(1)itcanbeappliedtoblack-boxmodels(albeitwithpromptmodifications;seeAppendixE);and(2)itis
highlyefficient. Thiseliminatestheneedtore-sampleoraggregatemultipleLLMresponses,arequirement
forotherblack-boxUQmethodslikesemanticentropy(Kuhnetal.,2023).
†Leadauthor.Correspondencetodevic@usc.edu.
‡WorkdonewhileinterningatApple.
1
5202
tcO
21
]IA.sc[
1v90401.0152:viXra
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90
AUROC of Trace Length
.fnoC
dezilabreV
fo
CORUA
90
85
80
75
MedQA
70
NonambigQA SciQ
65
60
Qwen2.5-Instruct (Base Model)
55
iw-SFT (Reasoning Model)
50
50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90
AUROC of Trace Length
.fnoC
dezilabreV
fo
CORUA
TriviaQA
MMLU
MediQ
SuperGPQA
Qwen2.5-Instruct (Base Model)
OpenThinker2 (Reasoning Model)
Figure1: Reasoningpost-trainingimprovesbothverbalizedconfidenceandtracelengthasuncer-
taintysignals. ScatterplotshowingverbalizedconfidenceandtracelengthperformanceintermsofAU-
ROC.Eachpointrepresentsadifferentdataset,andarrowsconnectthesamedatasetbeforeandafterrea-
soningpost-training.Tworeasoningmodels—iw-SFT-32B(Qin&Springenberg,2025)andOpenThinker2-
32B(Guhaetal.,2025)—havebetterverbalizedconfidenceperformancethantheirbasemodelQwen2.5-
32B-Instructformanydatasets(utilizingPrompt2). However,thetracelengthalsoemergesasapowerful
uncertaintysignalafterpost-training,andhascomparablepowerinpredictingwhethertheresponsewas
correct.
Withtheadventoflargereasoningmodels(LRMs)—LLMspost-trainedeitherdirectlywithRLalgorithms
like GRPO on large datasets of mathematical and scientific reasoning problems, or with fine-tuning on
suchmodels’reasoningtraces—therehasbeenarenewedinterestinverbalizedconfidencemethodsfor
uncertaintyquantification(Zengetal.,2025;Meietal.,2025). RecentworkbyYoonetal.(2025)provides
empirical evidence that LRMs have more calibrated verbalized uncertainty estimates when compared to
theirequivalentpre-RLvariants.Zhangetal.(2025a)showthatlinearprobesonLRMhiddenstatestrained
topredictthecorrectnessoftheoutputcanbeusedtoimprovethetokenefficiencyofgenerationsviaearly
termination.
Thesefindingssuggestthatreasoningpost-trainingmayfundamentallyalterhowmodelsunderstandand
expresstheirownuncertainty. However,severalimportantquestionsremainunderexplored: Howrobust
are these improvements in confidence estimation across different settings? Do the benefits of reasoning
training extend beyond verbalized confidence to other forms of zero-shot uncertainty expression? And
whatmechanismsdrivetheseimprovements?
In this work we study an alternative confidence signal: the length of reasoning traces themselves. Intu-
itively, if a model is uncertain about a problem, it might engage in more extensive reasoning, producing
longer traces as it works through its uncertainty. Problems the model finds straightforward might elicit
shorter, more direct responses. While prior work has shown that reasoning post-training causes trace
lengths to grow in general (Yi et al., 2025; Shen et al., 2025; Guha et al., 2025; Jin et al., 2025), its utility
as a zero-shot confidence signal and how this might be affected by reasoning training remains largely
unexplored.
Weinvestigatethesequestionsthroughcomprehensiveexperimentsacrossmultiplemodels,datasets,and
promptingstrategies. Ourmaincontributionsareasfollows.
1. Trace Length as an Emergent Zero-Shot Confidence Estimate. In Section 4, we show that rea-
2
soningtracelengthbecomesameaningfulzero-shotconfidenceestimateafterreasoningpost-training,
performingcomparablytoverbalizedconfidenceacrossarangeofsettings(seeFigure1). Crucially,this
signalisnotpresentinbasemodels,suggestingthatthepost-trainingprocessfundamentallyaltersthe
relationshipbetweentracelengthandcorrectness. Furthermore,unlikeverbalconfidenceelicitation,it
requiresnopromptmodification,makingitespeciallysuitableforblack-boxuseatinferencetime.
2. ComparativeAnalysisofVerbalConfidenceandTraceLength. InSection4.1,weanalyzethere-
lationshipbetweenverbalconfidenceandtracelength,findingthatwhilethesemeasuresbecomecorre-
latedafterreasoningtraining,theyoftencaptureslightlydifferingsignalsofuncertainty. Weshowthat
simple combinations of both signals yield superior confidence estimates compared to either measure
alone.
3. Mechanisms Behind Trace Length’s Emergence as a Confidence Estimate. In Section 5, we in-
vestigatethequestionofwhytracelengthbecomesareliableconfidencesignalafterreasoningtraining,
observingthattheeffectremainsevenaftercontrollingforpotentialconfounderssuchasproblemdif-
ficulty and GRPO-induced length bias. We identify high-entropy or “forking” tokens (Bigelow et al.,
2025;Wangetal.,2025c)—whichoftencoincidewithintuitiveepistemicmarkerssuchas“maybe”and
“wait”—asplayingakeyrole. Weshowthatthenumberofforkingtokensinatraceisanothersimple
zero-shotconfidencemeasurethatonlyemergesafterreasoningpost-training,andishighlycorrelated
withtracelength. Moreover,theaverageentropyofatokenisdirectlypredictiveofitsusefulnessasan
overalluncertaintyindicator. Remarkably,evencountingtheoccurrencesofthesinglehighest-entropy
tokenwithinatraceachievesstrongUQperformance. Webelievethatadeeperstudyofforkingtokens
willbeakeysteptowardsthescientificunderstandingofuncertaintyinLLMs.
2 Related Work
WecoversomeofthemostcloselyrelatedworkhereanddeferadditionalworktoAppendixA.
TraceLengthinReasoningModels. Recentresearchhasexaminedhowreasoningtrainingaffectstrace
lengthinlanguagemodels.Dimakis(2025)observedthatreasoningmodels,particularlyDeepseek-R1,gen-
erate longer reasoning traces for incorrect answers than correct ones, a pattern subsequently confirmed
by other studies (Marjanovic´ et al., 2025; Balachandran et al., 2025; Shrivastava et al., 2025; Ballon et al.,
2025). Notably, Zheng et al. (2023) observe that instruction-tuned LLMs can often accurately predict the
length of their own answers. While prior work has utilized this observation to develop methods for re-
ducingtracelengthorimprovingaccuracy(Quetal.,2025;Shrivastavaetal.,2025;Hassidetal.,2025;Wu
etal.,2025),weexploretracelengthasanindicatorofmodelconfidence. Beyondthedocumenteddiffer-
enceinmeanlengths,wedemonstratethattracelengthprovidesafine-grainedconfidencesignalcapable
ofdistinguishingbetweenlikely-correctandlikely-incorrectresponses. Mostcloselyrelatedtoourwork
is Vanhoyweghen et al. (2025), who examine various heuristics derived from reasoning traces to predict
response accuracy. However, their evaluation is limited to two models and two datasets, one of which
is exceptionally challenging (achieving sub-10% model accuracy). In contrast, our evaluation spans a di-
verserangeofdatasetswithvaryingdifficultylevels,revealingthattracelengthservesasasubstantially
strongerindicatorofcorrectnessthansuggestedbythefindingsofVanhoyweghenetal.(2025).
Post-Training-Free Confidence Estimates in Reasoning Models. We provide a brief overview of
existing techniques for confidence estimation in language models that do not require direct fine-tuning.
SeveralrecentworkshaveevaluatedLLMs’self-verbalizedconfidenceasazero-shotconfidenceestimation
approach(Zengetal.,2025;Yoonetal.,2025),findingthatitoftenperformsreasonablywellandshowsim-
provementfollowingreasoningtraining.Beyondverbalizedconfidence,existingworkexploresalternative
3
UQtechniquesthatrequirevaryingdegreesofmodelaccess. Theseincludemethodsthatleverageinternal
tokenprobabilities(Duanetal.,2024),approachesthattrainprobestopredictuncertaintybasedoninternal
modelstates(Kossenetal.,2024;Zhangetal.,2025a),andtechniquesthatutilizemultiplegenerationsfrom
themodel’spredictivedistributionforeachquery(Kuhnetal.,2023;Manakuletal.,2023;Farquharetal.,
2024). Inacomprehensivecomparisonofthesemethods,Taoetal.(2025)foundthatverbalizedconfidence
estimatesgenerallyoutperformbothsampling-basedandtoken-probability-basedapproaches.
3 Experimental Setup: Datasets, Models, and Evaluation
Models. We evaluate four 32B reasoning models: iw-SFT (Qin & Springenberg, 2025), OpenThinker2
(Guha et al., 2025), Skywork-OR1 (He et al., 2025a), and R1-Distill (Guo et al., 2025). Importantly, each
modelisafine-tunedvariantofQwen2.5-32B(Yangetal.,2024a). SimilartoYoonetal.(2025),thisallows
us to quantify how various post-training approaches influence the verbalized confidence abilities of the
resultingmodel. Wealsoevaluatetwo7BreasoningmodelsbasedonQwen2.5-7B-Instruct: Nemotron-7B
(Nathawanietal.,2025)andOpenThinker3-7B.DetailsonmodelsareinAppendixC.Wepointoutthatiw-
SFT and OpenThinker are versions of Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct which are supervised fine-tuned (SFT) with
completely open data and code. As such, we have complete knowledge of the post-training procedure,
and guessing whether certain additional post-training steps were taken which could have improved or
reducedtheperformanceofverbalizedconfidenceestimationabilitiesisnotrequired. Incontrast,wenote
thatR1-Distillisafine-tunedversionofthe(non-instruct)Qwen2.5-32B,thedatausedtocreateR1-Distill
isprivate,andSkyworks-OR1usesR1-Distillasitsbasemodel.
Prompts and Evaluation. We run our evaluations using three standard verbalized confidence prompts
detailedinAppendixE:(1)alinguisticconfidencepromptwhichasksamodeltooutputconfidencephrases
such as “Highly Likely” (Prompt 1, taken from Yoon et al. (2025)); (2) a numeric confidence elicited from
the range [0,100] (Prompt 2, taken from Mei et al. (2025)); and (3) A top-k prompt for k = 5 (Prompt 3,
from Mei et al. (2025); Tian et al. (2023)). We also use the identical evaluation framework of Yoon et al.
(2025); namely, we use evalchemy (Raoof et al., 2025) as well as lm-evaluation-harness (Gao et al., 2024)
forefficientinferencewithvLLM.
Datasets. We report results on ten datasets detailed and cited in Appendix D. The datasets span simple
mathematical(MMLU)andnon-mathematicalreasoning(MMLU-Pro-NoMath),datasetsbuilttomeasure
aleatoric uncertainty (FolkTexts), and multiple choice / free-response QA questions (TriviaQA, Nonam-
bigQA,MedQA,etc.).
3.1 EvaluationMetrics
The standard approach for evaluating confidence expressions (Yoon et al., 2025; Xiong et al., 2024) often
involves reporting multiple metrics: accuracy, Brier score, Expected Calibration Error (ECE), and Area
UndertheReceiverOperatingCharacteristiccurve(AUROC),tonameafew. However,thesemetricscan
often tell conflicting stories about the performance of verbal confidence in a model; in Appendix B, we
provideanexamplewherealowerECEisnotaccompaniedbyahigherAUROC.
For zero-shot confidence estimates specifically, especially verbalized confidence, we view AUROC as the
mostusefulmetrictostudy.AUROChasthefollowingpropertiesthatmakeitsuitableforUQinreal-world
applicationsinvolvingLLMs:
1. Captures discriminative ability. A useful metric must reward an uncertainty measure for distin-
guishing meaningfully between less likely and more likely predictions, and between correct and in-
correct predictions. Both AUROC and Brier score do this. By contrast, ECE measures only whether
4


=== Unnatural Languages Are Not Bugs but Features for LLMs.pdf ===
5202
nuJ
3
]LC.sc[
2v62910.3052:viXra
Unnatural Languages Are Not Bugs but Features for LLMs
KeyuDuan*1 YiranZhao*1 ZhiliFeng2 JinjieNi1 TianyuPang3 QianLiu3 TianleCai4 LongxuDou3
KenjiKawaguchi1 AnirudhGoyal5 J.ZicoKolter2 MichaelQizheShieh1
Abstract
Table1.Concreteexamplesofnaturalcontexts’unnaturalversion
Large LanguageModels(LLMs)havebeenob- inSycContextQAandSimGSM8K.
served to process non-human-readable text se- NaturalContext UnnaturalVersion
quences,suchasjailbreakprompts,oftenviewed
The stock price of (alt+eqn={\\>; {};The\\,\\stock
as a bug for aligned LLMs. In this work, we
GoldMine Inc. in- baaelkrie@nuier priceungeureau
present a systematic investigation challenging
creased by 20% last got sich last ’#GM;;heidisation
thisperception,demonstratingthatunnaturallan- week. Inc.weekestig%}20%durch’),png
guages - strings that appear incomprehensible encrypt render \"OK Gold-
to humans but maintain semantic meanings for Mine.",preventDefault
LLMs - contain latent features usable by mod-
Carly collected 7 |Each and : algebra dinner! abso-
els. Notably,unnaturallanguagespossesslatent starfish with 5 arms lutely7do):shortly.seastarcollect-
features that can be generalized across differ- eachandoneseastar edthe‘’kW)$,one!5!14‘starfish
entmodelsandtasksduringinference. Further- with14arms. with sic}}_{\label Carly} arms.
more, models fine-tuned on unnatural versions Onehorailey constructed WriteSta-
ofinstructiondatasetsperformon-parwiththose tus($$\ToggleZwezeichnungOK
trainedonnaturallanguage,achieving49.71win
ratesinLength-controlledAlpacaEval2.0inav-
erage across various base models. In addition, largelyattributedtotargetedalignmenttraining(Weietal.,
throughcomprehensiveanalysis,wedemonstrate 2021;Ouyangetal.,2022),whichpost-trainmodelstobet-
thatLLMsprocessunnaturallanguagesbyfilter- terfollowinstructionsandadheretopreferredbehaviors.
ingnoiseandinferringcontextualmeaningfrom
Despitebeingspecificallytuned,nonhuman-readabledata
filtered words. Our code is publicly available
sometimescanunexpectedlyinfluencemodelbehavior. In
athttps://github.com/John-AI-Lab/
computervision,Ilyasetal.(2019);Nguyenetal.(2015)
Unnatural_Language.
findthatseeminglyunrecognizableimagescouldbelever-
agedtotrainreasonablegoodimageclassificationmodels.
Thisphenomenonextendstonaturallanguageprocessing,
1.Introduction
whereZouetal.(2023)demonstratethatLLMscouldalso
LargeLanguageModels(LLMs)(OpenAI,2023;Touvron be prompted with an unreadable suffix to generate objec-
etal.,2023;Dubeyetal.,2024;anthropic,2024)haveshown tionable outputs, even though LLMs are well-trained for
remarkable capabilities in understanding and generating notdoingso. Besides,Pfauetal.(2024)discoversthatby
human-readable text, achieving impressive performance appending non human-readable filler tokens to the input,
acrosstasks,spanningfromquestionanswering(Bisketal., LLMscouldsolvealgorithmictasksmoreaccurately. How-
2020;Nietal.,2024)andmathematicalreasoning(Cobbe ever,regardingLLMs’surprisingbehaviorsinresponseto
et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2024) to nonhuman-readableinputs,therelackssystematicstudies
open-ended dialogue (Li et al., 2023). Such abilities are exploringthepropertiesandapplicationsofsuchnonhuman-
readablestringsandinterpretingtheunderlyingmechanisms
*Equal contribution 1National University of Singapore inLLMs. Thisraisesafundamentalquestion:whetherthese
2Carnegie Mellon University 3Sea AI Lab 4Princeton Univer- nonhuman-readablestringsaretrulydevoidofmeaningor
sity 5Mila, University of Montreal. Correspondence to: Keyu
containlatentfeaturesusablebymodels?
Duan<k.duan@u.nus.edu>,YiranZhao<zhaoyiran@u.nus.edu>,
MichaelQizheShieh<michaelshieh@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
To answer the above research questions, we study a phe-
nomenonnamedunnaturallanguages-stringsthatdeviate
Proceedingsofthe42nd InternationalConferenceonMachine
Learning,Vancouver,Canada.PMLR267,2025.Copyright2025 fromnaturallanguagesyntaxandappearextremelynoisyto
bytheauthor(s). humanreaders,yetremainunderstandabletoLLMs. Specif-
1
UnnaturalLanguagesAreNotBugsbutFeaturesforLLMs
(a) Target:y QADatasets 93% (b)
Tony is half
𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠 𝑐∈𝒞 = ෍ ෍log𝑃(𝑦|[𝑐,𝑡]) Jacob's age <Unnatural Test 93%
𝑀∈ℳ𝑡∈𝒯 Context>
Compute <Context-related 88%
LLM
Loss Questions>
ℳ
<Answer>
86%
{ Half ‘ Ja 0.5
Translatethe UnnaturalLIMA
sentenceinto { year ‘ Ja 0.7
𝒯 naturallanguage 𝒞 { Title co Ja 1.0 <UnnaturalInstruction> M C o h d a e t l
<Response>
Sampling SelectBest Instruction On-par
Candidate Tuning
LIMA
{ Title ‘ Ja { Half ‘ Ja Chat
<NaturalInstruction> Model
UnnaturalString UpdatedUnnaturalString
:Set <Response> (c)
Figure1.(a):Unnaturallanguagessearchingmethod.(b):Weconstructquestion-answeringtasksusingunnaturalcontextsanddiscover
thatunnaturallanguagescanbedirectlytransferredacrossabroaderrangeoftasksandunderstoodbydiverseLLMs.(c):LLMsfine-tuned
onunnaturalversionsofinstructiondatasetsperformon-parwiththosetrainedonnaturallanguage.
ically,asillustratedinFigure1(a),weproposeanapproach etal.,2021). Wechosesimplequestionstominimizetheim-
tosearchforasemanticallyequivalentbutsyntacticallyun- pactofreasoningabilityonourresultsandfocusprimarily
naturalversionofthenaturalstring,wheresemanticequiv- onunnaturallanguagecomprehension. AswithSynContex-
alenceisestablishedthroughtheirabilitytobetranslated tQA,wetransformedthesecontextsintounnaturalversions.
backtonaturalformviamodelsperformingtranslationinfer- Table 1 shows concrete examples of two datasets. With
ence.Forthesearchingprocess,weemployagradient-based thesedatasets,wetestalargevarietyofLLMs,including
stochasticsamplingproceduretoobtainasetofcandidate open-sourcemodelsaswellascommercialmodels. There-
unnaturalstrings;evaluatetheirprobabilityofbeingtrans- sultsshowthatcomparedtonaturalcontext,allmodelscan
latedbacktothecorrespondingnaturalversionsacrossmul- recover82.0%oftheoriginalaccuracyonourconstructed
tiplemodels;andselecttheunnaturalcandidatethatyields SynContextQAdatasetand61.6%onSimGSM8K,demon-
thehighestprobability. Werepeattheprocessuntileither stratingthatunnaturallanguagescontainlatentfeaturesthat
convergenceoccursoramaximumnumberofiterationsis enablecomprehensionacrossdifferentscenarios.
reached, with the final converged string representing the
Moreover,weexplorewhethertheseunnaturallanguages
semanticallyequivalentunnaturalstring.
possesstransferablelatentfeaturesthatcanbeeffectively
Wefirstexplorewhethertheseunnaturallanguagespossess utilizedininstructiontuningtoimprovemodels’instruction-
latentfeaturesthatcanbegeneralizedacrossdifferentmod- following capabilities. Specifically, as shown in Figure
elsandtasksduringinference. Toinvestigatethis,asshown 1(c), we employ a high-quality but small size instruction
inFigure1(b),weconstructseveralcontext-basedquestion- tuningdataset LIMA(Zhou etal.,2023), and wereplace
answeringdatasets,wherethecontextisunnaturalobtained theoriginalinstructionswithourequivalentunnaturalver-
bythesearchingapproachwhilenaturalquestionsrelated sionssearchedusingourproposedapproach. Weshowthat
tothecontextareprovided. Specifically,topreventmodels the models fine-tuned on it and the original have on-par
fromrelyingoncommon-sensememorywhenanswering performanceonprestigiousbenchmarks,includingLength-
questions without context, we develop SynContextQA, a controlled(LC)AlpacaEval2.0(Lietal.,2023)andMixE-
syntheticdatasetgeneratedbyanotherLLM,containingcon- val(Nietal.,2024). Particularly,onLCAlpacaEval2.0,the
textsaboutnon-existententitiespairedwithcorresponding threemodels—Llama-3-8B(Dubeyetal.,2024),Gemma-
questions.Wethentransformednaturalcontextsintounnatu- 2-9B(Teametal.,2024),andLlama-3-70B(Dubeyetal.,
ralversionsusingtheunnaturallanguagesearchingmethod 2024)—tunedontheunnaturalLIMAachievesanwinrate
while preserving the original questions. Additionally, to of49.78%,47.13%,and52.22%againstthecorresponding
ensuremodelsdonotsimplyextractkeywordsfromunnat- modelstunedonthenaturalLIMA,respectively.
uralcontextsinSynContextQA,wecreateSimGSM8K,a
Thesefindingsstronglydemonstrateourkeyfindings: un-
datasetofsimplequestionsderivedfromGSM8K(Cobbe
naturallanguagesarenotbugsbutfeaturesforLLMs. Inad-
2
UnnaturalLanguagesAreNotBugsbutFeaturesforLLMs
dition,weattempttounderstandthemechanismsbywhich approachesofShinetal.(2020);Zouetal.(2023). Specifi-
LLMsprocesssuchunnaturallanguages. Wedemonstrate cally,ineachoptimizationiteration,theunnaturalstringx
thatLLMsprocessunnaturallanguagesbyeffectivelyfil- isfirsttokenizedbymodelM intox . Foreachposition,
1:n
teringoutirrelevanttokens. Furthermore,LLMscombine weidentifythetop-kmostinfluentialtokensX basedon
1:n
relevanttokensfromunnaturallanguagesandinfercontex- thegradientoftheoptimizationobjectiveofEquation2,i.e.,
tualmeaninginresponsetonaturalversionquestions.
(cid:0) (cid:88) (cid:1)
Top-k ∇ logP (S|x ,t) . (3)
x1:n M 1:n
t∈T
2.UnnaturalLanguagesSearchingMethod
We then generate B candidates {x˜(1),x˜(2),··· ,x˜(B)},
1:n 1:n 1:n
whereeachcandidatediffersfromx byexactlyonetoken,
Inthissection,weintroduceourapproachforsearchingthe 1:n
randomlysampledfromX . Thesecandidatesarethen
unnaturalversionofanygivennaturalstring. 1:n
decodedbacktostrings{x˜(1),x˜(2),··· ,x˜(B)}bymodelM
Problem description. We denote a natural string as S forsubsequentcross-modelunificationoptimization. This
anditsequivalentunnaturalversionasS′. Theequivalence candidategenerationprocessisappliedacrossallmodelsin
between them is formally defined as S ≡ LLM M (S′|t), M,yieldingB|M|totalcandidates. Thecandidatewiththe
where t represents a reconstruction task—such as trans- optimallossisselectedforthenextiteration. Thisprocess
lating the unnatural sentence into natural language—and continuesuntilconvergenceoruntilreachingapre-defined
LLM M (S′|t) denotes the output of model M given in- numberofiterations.
put S′ under task prompt t. Furthermore, we define the
log-probability of model M generating natural string S Implementationdetails. Inpractice,tokenizedsequences
when given unnatural string x under task prompt t as
ofxhavevaryinglengthsacrossoptimizationiterationsdue
logP (S|x,t). Therefore,theunnaturalstringsearching todifferentmodelsemployingdistincttokenizers,withno
M
directone-to-onemappingbetweentokensandwords. To
problemcanbeformulatedas
maintaingeneralizabilityandinlinewithZouetal.(2023);
S′ :=argmaxlogP (S|x,t), (1) Zhaoetal.(2024),weinitializexthroughacombinationof
M
x∈X shufflingwordsinS andrandomlyinsertingseveralspecial
characters “!”. Algorithm 1 in Appendix A1 provides a
whereX representstheunnaturallanguagesspace,encom-
detailedillustrationofthesearchingalgorithm. Inaddition,
passing all possible strings of arbitrary length. However,
weconductverificationexperimentstodemonstratethatour
searchingtheentireunnaturalspaceiscomputationallyin-
searchedunnaturalstringscanbeaccuratelytranslatedback
feasible. Forsimplicityandwithoutlossofgenerality,we
totheirnaturalversions. Detailsarefurtherillustratedin
constrainxtomaintainafixedlengthatthetokenlevel,i.e.,
x ∈ X
M
, whereX
M
≜ {x (cid:12) (cid:12)|tokenize
M
(x)| = n,x ∈ X} AppendixA2.
andnisapredefinedconstantlength.
3.UnnaturalLanguagesCanbeUnderstood
Furthermore,toenhancethegeneralizabilityoftheobtained
AcrossTasksandLLMs
unnaturallanguages,weemploymultiplemodels,denoted
asM={M 1 ,M 2 ,...,M k },tocollaborativelysearchfor In this section, we investigate whether unnatural lan-
unnaturalstrings. Additionally,weintroduceasetoftasks guages—generatedbyAlgorithm1viareconstructiontasks
T = {t 1 ,t 2 ,...,t m } as a collaborative optimization ob- acrossmultiplemodels—canbedirectlytransferredacross
jective. Therefore, our goal of searching the equivalent abroaderrangeoftasksandunderstoodbydiverseLLMs.
unnaturalstringS′ isformulatedassolvingthefollowing
optimizationproblem: 3.1.ExperimentSetup
S′ := argmax (cid:88) (cid:88) logP (S|x,t). (2) ToevaluateLLMs’genuineunderstandingofunnaturallan-
M
x∈(cid:83)
M∈M
XMM∈Mt∈T guages, we design questions closely related to unnatural
contexts. We employ context-based question-answering
problemswherethecontextisexpressedinunnaturallan-
Algorithm description. The optimization problem de-
guages while maintaining questions in natural language.
fined in Equation 2 is a discrete optimization problem as
Thisapproachhelpsisolatethemodels’understandingof
X isadiscretespaceofsize|V |n,whereV denotes
M M M unnaturallanguageswithoutintroducingadditionalcompre-
the vocabulary set of the model M. Due to the discrete
hensionchallenges.
natureoftheproblem,gradient-basedoptimizationmethods
cannotbedirectlyapplied. Furthermore,thesearchspaceis Benchmarks. ❶SynContextQA.Webeginwithaclassic
toovastforexhaustiveexploration. Therefore,weproposea commonsense question-answering task, where questions
sample-and-selectionalgorithminspiredbytheoptimization areaskedinrelationtogivencontextualknowledge. How-
3
UnnaturalLanguagesAreNotBugsbutFeaturesforLLMs
Table2.PerformancecomparisonfordifferentcontextsacrossdifferentmodelsonSynContextQAandSimGSM8Kdatasets.Allanswers
weregeneratedunderzero-shotsettingwithoutsampling. “Direct”referstomodelsusedforunnaturallanguagessearching, while
“Transfer”indicatestheimplementationofsearchedunnaturallanguages.
SynContextQA SimGSM8K
Model
Natural Shuf-InJ Unnatural Natural Shuf-InJ Unnatural
Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1 0.89 0.55 0.93 0.85 0.20 0.42
Direct Vicuna-7B-v1.5 0.96 0.40 0.86 0.63 0.12 0.20
Average 0.93 0.48 0.90 0.74 0.16 0.31
Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct 0.99 0.29 0.63 0.58 0.18 0.50
Gemma-2-9B-Instruct 0.98 0.35 0.65 0.97 0.21 0.41
Meta-Llama-3-70B-Instruct 0.97 0.73 0.93 1.00 0.38 0.75
Transfer
GPT-3.5-turbo 0.98 0.73 0.93 0.91 0.32 0.53
GPT-4o 0.98 0.61 0.88 0.95 0.25 0.53
Average 0.98 0.54 0.80 0.88 0.27 0.54
ever,usingexistingcommonsenseQAdatasetspresentsa shuffledlanguage withinjectedspecialtokens(Shuf-Inj),
challenge,asLLMsmayanswerquestionsbasedontheir which serves as the initialization step for our unnatural
pre-trainedknowledgeratherthantheprovidedcontext. To languagessearchalgorithminAlgorithm1.
addressthis,weleverageGPT-3.5(Achiametal.,2023)to
Experiment Details. For SynContextQA, we evalu-
generate knowledge about non-existing entities and their
ateperformanceusingexactkeywordmatching,whilefor
correspondingquestions,namedasSynContextQA,thereby
SimGSM8K,weuseaccuracyastheevaluationmetric.
ensuringthemodelmustderiveanswersfromthegivencon-
textratherthanrelyonpre-existinginformation.Promptsfor
3.2.MainResults
generationandpost-processingareillustratedinAppendix
A3. We then transformed natural contexts into unnatural AsshowninTable2,forSynContextQA,thetestaccuracy
versionsusingtheunnaturallanguagessearchingmethod ofallmodelsinunnaturallanguagesison-parwiththeone
whilepreservingtheoriginalquestions. ❷SimGSM8K.Fur- of natural language, by a large margin with Shuf-InJ. In
thermore,toensuremodelsdonotsimplyextractkeywords average,thetestaccuracyoftransferredmodelsinunnatural
fromunnaturalcontextsinSynContextQA,wetesttheun- languagesis80.4%. ForSimGSM8K,thetestaccuracyof
naturallanguagesonGSM8K(Cobbeetal.,2021),amore mostmodelsonnaturalquestionsisover80%,indicating
complextaskrequiringreasoningcapability.Asourprimary thesimplicityofquestions,thusmitigatingtheconcerning
objectiveistoassesstheabilitytocomprehendunnatural of question complexity. Meanwhile, the performance of
languages,ratherthantoevaluatereasoningability,wese- close-source models could also answer half of the ques-
lect100relativelysimplequestionsfromthewholetestset, tionscorrectly,outperformingtheShuf-InJbyanaveraged
namedSimGSM8K.Weshowaconcreteexampleforeach margin of 26.7%. Both results indicate that such unnat-
datasetinTable1. urallanguagesishighlytransferrableacrossmodelswith
differentarchitecturesandtrainingcorpus,includingGPT-
BackboneModels. WeselectadiverserangeofLLMs,
4o (Hurst et al., 2024), which is considered as the most
spanningfromsmalleropen-sourcemodelstolargerclosed-
well-alignedmodels. Asaresult,itmitigatestheconjecture
source ones. Specifically, we use Mistral-7B-Instruct-
thatsuchunnaturallanguagesisaglitchofspecificLLMs,
v0.1 (Jiang et al., 2023), Vicuna-7B-v1.5 (Chiang et al.,
butageneralphenomenonandinherentpropertyforLLMs.
2023), Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct (Dubey et al., 2024),
Gemma2-9B-Instruct(Teametal.,2024), Meta-Llama-3- It is worthwhile to note that there is a significant per-
70B-Instruct, GPT-3.5-turbo (Achiam et al., 2023), GPT- formance gap between the natural and unnatural set for
4o(Hurstetal.,2024). Furthermore,tobalanceefficiency SimGSM8K. This gap can be attributed to the increased
intheunnaturallanguagessearchingalgorithmwithgener- complexityofSimGSM8Kcontexts,whichtypicallycom-
alizability,weemployMistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1andVicuna- prise multiple interconnected sentences. Furthermore,
7B-v1.5,tworenownedopen-sourcemodelsfromdistinct SimGSM8Kquestionsrequiresophisticatedmulti-steprea-
series,asthemodelsetM inAlgorithm1. soningprocesses,makingthemsubstantiallymorechalleng-
ingthanstandardSynContextQAtasks. However,thisisnot
Baselines. Wemainlyemploytwobaselines. (i)natural
theupperboundoftheperformanceofLLMsonunnatural
language,whichusestheoriginalunmodifiedtext,and(ii)
4


